Cape Town mayor Dan Plato says that public transport infrastructure and maintenance of the city’s road network remain the top spending priorities for the city’s transport directorate for the next financial year. The annual budget for the 2021/22 financial year was approved by a full sitting of council, last week with the directorate’s budget for the new financial year amounting to R7.5 billion with R2.2 billion budgeted for capital projects, and R5.3 billion for operations. A key priority is the roll-out of phase 2A of the MyCiTi bus service to Mitchells Plain, Khayelitsha, Claremont and Wynberg. Up to R7.1 billion is being spent over a period of seven years to provide commuters from 30 communities with a bus service that is affordable, safe, and reliable, the City of Cape Town said. It is estimated that through the construction of the infrastructure alone, such as new roads, stations, and stops, up to 7,206 job opportunities will be created over the seven-year period. Once fully operational, up to 800 people will be permanently employed to keep the service running, it said. The new road infrastructure will also assist to alleviate traffic congestion in the areas where the MyCiTi service is rolled out, Plato said. “One cannot underestimate the significant contribution the roll-out of Phase 2A of the MyCiTi bus service will make to Cape Town’s economic recovery during and after the Covid-19 pandemic. “Phase 2A is a massive undertaking by the city to bring affordable public transport closer to those who need it most. “The routes will connect about 30 communities along the way and will significantly improve access to opportunities and amenities. “The city’s investment will also greatly assist with urban regeneration of the areas where the routes and stations will be constructed, and we hope to see private investment and developments following over time,” said mayor Plato. Some of the major capital projects planned for the new financial year are: Infrastructure related to the roll-out of Phase 2A of the MyCiTi bus service – R1.4 billion
Infrastructure related to public transport interchanges for buses and minibus-taxis – R163 million
Rehabilitation of roads across Cape Town – R140 million
Facilities for pedestrians, cyclists, and the improvement of universal access – R88 million
Projects to relieve traffic congestion – R87 million
Reconstruction of roads – R23 million The operating budget constitutes 71% of the directorate’s overall budget for the year, with priorities being: Maintenance of stormwater and road infrastructure, public transport interchanges and traffic signals – R793 million
Security at public transport interchanges – R101 million
The MyCiTi bus service – R573 million
The Dial-A-Ride service for commuters with special needs – R28 million “We are all aware of the impact of Covid-19 on South Africa’s economy and the city is concerned about further budget cuts by the National Treasury as a result,” Plato said. “All-in-all, Cape Town’s road network, valued at R146 billion, covers a distance of 10,420 km. “Regular ongoing road maintenance is crucial to prolong the longevity of the network so that people and goods can reach their destinations and assist with building our local economy. “I want to assure residents that we are trying our best to achieve more with less resources, and to keep on improving our roads across the city.” MyCiTi service The MyCiTi bus service announced its reviewed fares for 2021 at the end of May. The group said its Mover and Standard fares have increased as a result of rising fuel prices. “We have reduced the smallest Mover package to R20 so that even more people can enjoy the MyCiTi bus service.The Monthly Pass remains R790. So, regular passengers can continue to enjoy unlimited travel without paying more,” it said. A myconnect card will still cost R35. “If you want to first try out our service you can still get a single-trip card from stations for R30,” it said. Anyone visiting Cape Town for a short stay can still enjoy unlimited travel for 1, 3 or 7 days by loading Day Passes on your myconnect card. Day Passes also remain unchanged at R70, R160 and R230. Read: Government moves forward on controversial new driving law for South Africa