The Huawei Band 6 smartwatch will soon be coming to South Africa and will offer significant improvements over its predecessor. Click here to learn more about the Huawei Band 6. From a superior design to powerful fitness features, the Huawei Band 6 is a must for those in the market for a new smartwatch. It boasts a variety of important health tools that ensure you are always notified if any problems arise, including 24/7 heart rate monitoring powered by Huawei’s TruSeen 4.0 technology. TruSeen 4.0 uses an optical lens and AI-based data processing to track your heart rate extremely accurately, and if your heart rate falls outside of safe levels the Band 6 will notify you. The Huawei Band 6 also tracks your SpO2 levels at all times, and the device will notify you if these levels drop too low. Other important features available with the Huawei Band 6 include stress monitoring, breathing training guides, sleep duration and quality monitoring, up to 96 exercise mods, and a personal assistant that makes it easy to control your calls, messages, and music. The Huawei Band 6 offers an amazing 2-week battery life, too, and if you still manage to get caught with low battery, you can get 2 days of use from just a 5-minute charge. The Huawei Band 6 boasts a new and improved design which makes it even more stylish and functional than before. Huawei has increased the Band 6’s display size to offer a 148% larger viewable area. This comprises a 1.47-inch AMOLED FullView display that boasts a 64% screen-to-body ratio, while its 368 x 194 resolution features 282 PPI to ensure all visuals are crystal clear. You can also make use of the Huawei Watch Face Store to choose from a variety of watch face designs. This makes it easy to make the watch fit your personal style. South Africans will be able to choose between two stylish colours when the Huawei band 6 launches – Graphite Black and Sakura Pink – which will make it a great addition to your daily look. Launch dates and pricing will be announced soon, so keep your eyes on Huawei’s website. Click here to learn more about the Huawei Band 6.