The City of Cape Town warns motorists who are due to renew their vehicle licences in June and July 2021 that they should do so sooner rather than later – and preferably online. The city said it expects a peak in renewals, as many licences will expire over this two month period, due to the Covid-19 lockdown licensing extension given to motorists last year. It warned further that a Covid-19 could have a material impact on its operations, and that motorists should plan ahead of time. While the warning comes from Cape Town, the rest of the country is likely to see a similar rush as part of a knock-on effect from last year’s hard lockdown. In Joburg, alerts have also been sent out to motorists whose licences expire in July. This is due to the Covid-19 extension given to motorists whose motor vehicle licences expired in March, April and May 2020. “With the recent data indicating a Covid-19 third wave, we encourage customers to please make use of our online service offerings, where possible, and to factor in enough lead time of about three to four weeks from application to receiving the licence, based on the postal service delivery timeframes,” said deputy mayor Ian Neilson. “We urge customers who are due to renew their discs during this peak period to do so as soon as they can, to avoid unnecessary delays and possible fines.” The city outlined some tips to prepare for the rush as follows: Plan for a turnaround time of approximately three to four weeks currently from application to receipt of the licence when applying online via e-Services. Plan ahead and check your licence disc renewal date. The length of queues at motor licensing offices have reduced in general. However, it may still seem long due to the social distancing and other Covid-19 measures that are in place. If customers must visit a customer office in person, remember that there is Covid-19 screening at the entrances and a limited number of customers are allowed in at a time due to Covid-19 regulations. Social distancing is required and must be adhered to and masks are compulsory. Motorists only need their ID for motor vehicle licensing and registration renewals. Motorists are reminded that they are not allowed to drive an unlicensed vehicle or a vehicle where a valid licence disc is not displayed. Motorists are further reminded to update their cell phone numbers and email addresses when applying and paying for their licences online and at licensing offices as they will be receiving renewal reminders via their cell phones or email addresses. Senior citizens, pregnant customers and customers with disabilities are urged to move to the front of the queue where they will be assisted as soon as possible. Read: Improvements for driver’s licences in South Africa are coming – including shorter wait times