Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma has published an amendment to the country’s adjusted level 4  lockdown regulations, clarifying a number of key issues. The latest gazette, published on Tuesday (29 June), states that: Hotels, lodges, timeshare facilities, resorts, guest houses and bed-and-breakfasts are able to operate at full capacity in terms of rooms available for accommodation, subject to strict adherence to all relevant protocols and related measures. The transportation of liquor is now permitted from manufacturing plants to storage facilities, and from any licensed premises for safe-keeping. The changes will offer relief to some in the tourism and wine industry who were caught off guard by the immediate introduction of the adjusted level 4 lockdown on Sunday evening. The gazette also confirmed that contact classes for all schools and universities will close from Wednesday (30 June). Schools In a seperate gazette, basic education minister Angie Motshekga confirmed the adjusted level 4 lockdown rules for schools. These include: All schools will close for learners (Grades R to 12) on 30 June 2021. All educators and non-teaching staff will continue with their administrative duties until 2 July 2021. Independent schools must close for contact classes for a period of two weeks from 30 June 2021. Schools will reopen on 19 July 2021 for all learners (Grades R to 12) to return to school. Schools that have been identified as vaccination sites remain open for the purpose of administering the vaccines and officials are required to present themselves for this purpose as planned. The National School Nutrition Programme will resume when schools reopen: Provided that schools must make the necessary arrangements to continue to provide feeding until 9 July 2021, including the option to provide food parcels to learners who are beneficiaries of the national school nutrition programme. The usual winter vacation learner support or catch-up programmes for Grades 11 and 12, as organised and implemented by the Provincial Departments of Education, districts and schools, will continue under strict compliance with the minimum health, safety and social distancing measures on Covid-19. Travel While not officially gazetted at the time of writing, Transport minister Fikile Mbalula has also outlined the rules for travel under the country’s new level 4 lockdown. In a media briefing on Tuesday (29 June), Mbalula said that the key points include: Travel is restricted in line with the curfew of 21h00 – 04h00, with exceptions only made for emergencies and essential workers.
Public transport is also not permitted during the curfew period, except for circumstances outlined in the regulations.
Inter-provincial travel for leisure to and from Gauteng is prohibited in terms of the regulations, with roadblocks set up to enforce these and other lockdown regulations.
Restrictions on the 70% loading capacity for public transport remain for long-distance travel (0ver 200km). 100% capacity for short-distance travel is still permitted.
Restrictions on international air travel remain, however there is an exception on curfew for long-haul flight departures and landings.
International air travel is restricted to the following airports:

OR Tambo International Airport
King Shaka International Airport
Cape Town International Airport
Lanseria International Airport
Kruger Mpumalanga International Airport Read: South Africa’s jobs bloodbath continues – these are the workers most affected