Digital signatures have become a key part of business systems – particularly as remote and hybrid working has risen in popularity. They are also a great way to reduce your organisation’s environmental impact because you will be reducing your use of stationery like paper, ink, and envelopes. CM.com’s electronic signature solution, Sign, has helped countless businesses leverage this important technology quickly and effectively. Click here to learn more. The solution offers useful features and tools that set it apart from competitors and make it the obvious choice for your business in terms of functionality, cost-savings. Documents that need to be signed are one of the largest bottlenecks in the customer journey. Traditionally, these have needed to be delivered by post or by hand – and there has always been the risk of lost or damaged documents. With Sign, you can prevent this problem by giving your entire organisation access to a quick and simple alternative. You can use the Sign web-based application or you can leverage the Sign API from CM.com to customise the solution for your business requirements. All of this means that with CM.com, the entire signing process can take just a few seconds and can be done across mobile, tablet, and desktop devices. All of these processes are secure because of the rigorous security measures CM.com has included in this solution. Two-factor authentication capabilities is additionally possible to sign a document, including the use of an OTP to ensure ultimate security and peace-of-mind. CM.com has focused on ensuring the signature process is very user friendly, and therefore redesigned the platform earlier this year based on the latest UX insights. This means the solution is specifically designed to make the signature process streamlined and simple, which in turn reduces the chances of errors or confusion by signatories. One great feature of the CM.com electronic signature solution is that it is more affordable than most competitors. This is because you pay per document signed, not per person that needs to sign, which is notable since many other electronic signature products charge you every time an additional person needs to sign the same document. Another unique feature of Sign is that you can have unlimited users on even the cheapest package. Usually, the cheapest versions of electronic signature solutions are limited to a single user, which is a problem for organisations that are looking to connect multiple employees who all are required to sign or review digital documents. CM.com’s multi-user Sign product therefore stands out within the electronic signature industry and is far more affordable for small to medium sized businesses to access. Another benefit of CM.com’s Sign solution is the ability to send invites via SMS or email which is available out-of-the-box. Another great feature that must be noted is that Sign users are able to send invites via WhatsApp Business – which offers even more reason to get onboard. The ability to send invites by SMS out-of-the-box makes it much easier and more affordable to reach everyone who needs to sign the document. CM.com’s Sign solution is designed to offer cheaper prices and increased accessibility while boasting all the features you will need. They also have an amazing local team who are always available to chat – whether you need help understanding the product, or want to brainstorm ways to customise it for your business. This means CM.com is not just a product – it is a comprehensive solution that keeps on giving. Click here to learn more.