Financial services group FNB is replacing its middle-market Gold accounts with a cheaper account called FNB Aspire. Customers will also be able to pay their banking fees using the group’s eBucks rewards system. FNB Aspire will carry a reduced monthly account at R99 (from R109 for the Gold Unlimited account) and will be available to customers who earn between R180,000 and R450,000 per annum. Notably, the monthly fee is up from the R89 per month Gold Fusion account, which along with Gold Unlimited, falls away. Account holders will need to make at least three transactions a month via the app to qualify. With its other accounts, the bank said it is keeping its entry market monthly account fees unchanged for another year, while Easy Zero and Easy PAYU cash withdrawals at FNB ATMs have been reduced by a rand to R7.00 per R1,000 (up to R2,000). Monthly account fees for the affluent market have however, been adjusted upwards, the bank said. The changes form part of FNB’s annual review – effective 1 July 2021. The bank has also zero rated several fees, including: Third-party payments;
InContact SMSes;
Cash@Till;
Seniors get one free branch cash deposit per month;
Individual customers on Easy Smart, Aspire, Premier and Private Clients get two free eWallets sends per month;
FNB Private Wealth and RMB Private Bank get unlimited free sends;
Pre-paid purchases like airtime remain free on the FNB App and Online Banking. FNB has also listed a host of changes to its eBucks and FNB Connect earn rules, split across its entry/middle market and affluent market accounts. This includes being able to earn eBucks without having to hit rewards tiers on the Aspire account, as well as the inclusion of the iStore as an eBucks partner for affluent accounts. Aspire accounts will be able to earn R150 in eBucks in four different categories, which include shopping at Shoprite/Checkers/USave; shopping at Clicks; fuel purchases at Engen; and buying bus tickets with Intercape. Other changes include: Easy PAYU, Easy Smart and Aspire Easy Smart customers get a R500 Shoprite/Checkers and uSave voucher a year when they spend and save with FNB or have FNB Funeral Cover or FNB Life Insurance.
Easy Smart customers can get up to R150 back in eBucks every month when they spend at selected retail partners including Shoprite/Checkers, Clicks and Engen.
PAYU customers will earn rewards for the first time and a weekly coupon on selected food items at Shoprite/Checkers/uSave.
Customers who only hold an FNB Aspire Credit Card will get 2 complimentary SLOW Lounge visits when they book with eBucks Travel.
Easy Smart customers get 300MB data, 30 voice minutes & 30 SMSs every month on their FNB Connect SIM with extra 300MB data when they top up their FNB Connect SIM with R51 or more during the month.
FNB Aspire customers receive 500MB data, 30 voice minutes & 30 SMSs every month on their FNB Connect with extra 500MB data when they top up their FNB Connect SIM with R100 or more during the month.
Spend and save with FNB or have an FNB Life/Funeral Cover policy for 12 months and we’ll reward you with R1 500 towards your next pair of sneakers or trainers on FNB Aspire. Private Clients, FNB Private Wealth, RMB Private Bank Spend and earn up to 15% back in eBucks at iStore.
Choose to pay your monthly account fee with your eBucks using the FNB App.
Unlock an Avis Car Hire discount of up to 40% off when you book flights on the FNB App.
Qualifying FNB Connect customers can get up to 2GB, 30 voice min and 30 SMSes each month.
Customers get up to 2GB data, 30 voice minutes & 30 SMSs every month on their FNB Connect SIM. Read: The 6 most common investment scams in South Africa: FNB