Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Coronavirus: In South Africa, there have been 13,246 new cases of Covid-19, taking the total reported to 1,774,312. Deaths have reached 58,223, while recoveries have climbed to 1,620,317, leaving the country with a balance of 95,772 active cases. The total number of vaccines administered is 1,965,812. This could have been done earlier: The Ministerial Advisory Committee (MAC) on Covid-19 says the increase in cases in Gauteng is a serious concern, and that the country should have moved to level 3 restrictions earlier. On Tuesday evening president Cyril Ramaphosa raised the nation’s Coivd-19 alert level, moving the curfew earlier and restricting alcohol sales and public gatherings. [EWN] Rule breakers: EFF leader Julius Malema says that his party will not listen to what Ramaphosa had to say, nor adhere to the lockdown restrictions that were imposed under lockdown Level 3, until he provides vaccinations. Addressing a crowd on Youth Day (16 June), Malema said that the party would march to the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority on Friday to raise its concerns. “It is personal like that. There will be sleep-ins there until (a) vaccine is provided by the government,” he said. [News24] SAA: Despite a commitment to funding, there remains controversy around plans to sell 51% of SAA to a private consortium. Due diligence on the consortium, and on SAA by the consortium, still have to be carried out. In addition, SAA’s financial statements have not been finalised and the airline has yet to settle on a route, flight and staffing plan. [Moneyweb] Jabu Mabuza: Former Eskom board chair and MultiChoice director has passed away following complications caused by Covid-19, his family said in a statement. Mabuza served as the chairman of Sun International Limited and was the lead independent non-executive director on the board of the MultiChoice Group, serving on various board committees. Prior to these roles, Mabuza was the interim executive chairman and acting group chief executive of Eskom. He resigned from Eskom last year. [MyBroadband] Markets: The US Federal Reserve’s decision to keep interest rates unchanged has boosted the dollar against the rand, with the local currency opening weaker on Thursday morning. The rand is trading at R13.98/$, R16.78/€ and R19.57/£.