Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma has gazetted South Africa’s adjusted level 4 lockdown restrictions. The restrictions, which will remain in place until 11 July, give effect to president Cyril Ramaphosa’s announcement on Sunday evening (27 June), including a complete prohibition on the sale of alcohol, a new evening curfew, and a ban on gatherings. The restrictions will remain in place for 14 days and will be assessed thereafter. They take effect on Monday, 28 June, and will run until 11 July. The changes are outlined in more detail below. Places closed to the public All gatherings are prohibited except at funerals, the workplace or when buying goods or services. Not mentioned directly by Ramaphosa during his address, the gazette states that several businesses and premises that would normally be open to the public will now be required to close in terms of the new prohibition on gatherings. The following must close to the public: Gyms and fitnesses centres;
Casinos;
Taverns, shebeens and bars;
Restaurants – except for off-site consumption;
Theatres and cinemas;
Museums;
Conference facilities;
Older persons residential facilities. Persons rendering security or maintenance at these facilities may continue to do so. Movement of persons All people are confined to their home from 21h00 – 04h00, except in the case of emergencies or if they are an essential worker. The closing time for all businesses permitted to remain open is 20h00; Leisure travel in and out of Gauteng province is prohibited, except in the case of businesses, emergencies, attending a funeral, moving residences or one of the other permitted reasons. People who are currently outside the province and reside there may return home. Gatherings All gatherings are prohibited, including religious and social gatherings. Funerals are permitted, but attendance is limited to 50 people. Stores and grocers and supermarkets – and all businesses that are allowed to remain open – have to limit the number of people inside to 50% of floor space. This includes customers and employees. Sporting events and matches may continue, but no spectators are allowed. Schools All schools will be closed for contact classes from 30 June, however early childhood development centres may remain open. Basic education minister Angie Motshekga is expected to provide her own update shortly. Alcohol The sale and dispensing of alcohol are strictly prohibited. This includes the transportation of alcohol, except where required for the production of hand sanitisers or cleaning products. No special dispensation for liquor licences will be given over this 14 day period. Transportation of liquor for export purposes is permitted. Transport Public transport facilities may contain to operate subject to further regulations introduced by transport minister Fikile Mbalula. Bus and taxi services may not carry more than 70% capacity for long-distance travel (a trip of 200km or more) but may carry 100% capacity for shorter trips. All passengers are required to wear a mask. Incitement An apparently new clause states that any person who incites, instigates, commands, or procures any other person to commit any offence in terms of these regulations is committing an offence and faces a possible fine or conviction not exceeding six months. Borders There are no changes to borders. The 20 land borders that were open before will remain open. The 33 land borders that were closed before remain closed.  Read: Lockdown level 4 is a killer blow for businesses and jobs in South Africa: industry