Content Services solutions like Kyocera Enterprise Content Management (ECM) make it easy to digitise your business documents and data into a single system. Enterprises face rapidly-increasing amounts of data that they must manage. Your organisation probably has stacks of different types of paper documents that slow down the efficiency of your employees, making it difficult to find the right documents quickly. Physical filing systems have proven to be time consuming and can result in you losing important information. It also makes it challenging when it comes to sharing and approving documents across your business quickly or securely. The solution to this is digitising these documents and applying metadata to them, so that you can then use a simple search interface to retrieve this data – a process which takes seconds rather than minutes, hours, or days. This digital format also simplifies sharing documents securely across the organisation, ensuring that they do not get lost, damaged, or stolen. Click here to learn more about Kyocera’s ECM solution. The first step is to organise your business information in one central location by implementing a Content Services solution, such as ECM. ECM offers the best functionality for digitising, sharing, using, and managing information across your entire organisation securely, and makes it easy to convert your physical documents and data into a digital format, streamlining your business processes and allowing for much easier access to this data. Additionally, this digital format makes it far easier to automate your workflows within a simple user interface, also making it easier to implement user access protocols, which ensures that your important business information is only accessed by those who need to use this data and have been given the appropriate permissions. Kyocera Document Solutions South Africa has an ECM solution that offers all the features above and much more. Kyocera ECM is a hosted or on premise enterprise content management solution that provides: Quick set-up time.
Reduced start-up, infrastructure, and IT administration costs.
Easy management of files and data from anywhere and at any time.
User-friendly interface.
Rich search feature – metadata makes search and retrieve easy. The solution also includes built-in business process automation software that will save your organisation hours of time with rule-based workflows that you can implement for time-consuming, mundane tasks. Additional important features include: Rigorous security protocols – Including automatic auditing, granular system security, and certification-based record management.
Kyocera Forms – Replace your paper forms with e-forms that are easy to design, and can be integrated into workflows seamlessly.
Simple data capture – Multi-channel capture applications make it easy to capture data from both paper and electronic files, and from multiple devices. Consider implementing an Enterprise Content Management (ECM) solution to start organising your business information in one central location, which digitally and securely stores all sensitive business data, allowing easy access to the information anytime, anywhere. If you need help finding the right ECM for your business, download the Enterprise Content Management (ECM) Solution Checklist today! Click here to learn more about Kyocera’s ECM solution.