Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma has published an amendment to the country’s level 3 lockdown regulations after confusion around the requirements of wearing masks and children. The latest gazette, published on Thursday (17 June), states that the wearing of a mask is mandatory when in a public place, excluding for a child under the age of six. While this had previously been the case, lockdown regulations published earlier this week stated that all South Africans would have to wear a mask – with no specific proviso made for children. The rest of the regulation remains in place, with South Africans facing a fine or imprisonment for failing to wear a mask in a public space. The new gazette also clarifies the requirement that banks must have in place under level 3 requirements, which were also previously omitted. These include: Banks must  have hand sanitisers in place at each automated teller machine (ATM);
Banks must take reasonable steps to ensure that people queuing are at least 1.5 metres apart. Move to level 3 On Tuesday (15 June), president Cyril Ramaphosa moved the country to a level 3 lockdown to prevent health facilities from being overwhelmed. He said that the priority now is to ensure that there are enough beds and healthcare workers to give the best possible care to those who need it. The new restrictions include: The hours of curfew are from 22h00 – 04h00
Non-essential establishments such as bars and fitness centres must close at 21h00
All gatherings will be limited to 50 people indoors and 100 people outdoors. Where the venue is too small to accommodate appropriate social distancing, 50% of the floor space may be used.
Attendance at funerals and cremation may not exceed 50 people.
Night vigils and after-funeral gatherings remain prohibited.
The sale of alcohol for off-site consumption is permitted between 10h00 – 18h00 from Monday to Thursday.
On-site alcohol consumption may continue until 21h00, subject to liquor licenses.
Alcohol in public is strictly prohibited.  Read: South Africa should start registering people over 50 for vaccines now: premier