The South African Medical Association (SAMA) says that government should look at introducing further restrictions in South Africa to combat fatigue. The not-for-profit group, which represents the interests of medical doctors in South Africa, has raised concerns that it is already difficult to secure hospital beds in parts of the country due to an increase in cases. Among other measures, it is calling for: A move to a stricter evening curfew, particularly over the weekends;
More restrictions on gatherings, particularly for in-door gatherings with poor ventilation;
Particular focus on taxis;
Stronger enforcement of mask-wearing, social distancing and quarantine protocols as lockdown fatigue sets in. The association’s Dr Angelique Coetzee said SAMA is also concerned about the slow roll-out of the vaccination processes which, will may have an impact on the severity of the third wave of the coronavirus currently hitting the country. “The plan was to reach five million people in phase 2 of the rollout, but this is being hampered by the slow rollout and poor adherence to non-pharmaceutical interventions such as possible poor ventilation that might be experienced in clinics administering the vaccine,” she said. “Taxis carrying more than 50% of their capacity might increase the spread of the virus inadvertently as winter sets in. These and other issues require urgent attention,” said Dr Coetzee. Also of concern to SAMA is that many people have begun suffering from so-called Covid-fatigue, with younger people in the main not adhering to non-pharmaceutical protocols such as wearing masks, social distancing, and quarantine protocols. “We cannot be fooled into a false sense of security around Covid-19. It is still out there, and still a threat to many people. We simply have to ensure we do everything we can to curb the spread of the disease, and we have to understand that each and every person has a role to play,” Dr Coetzee said. South Africa moved to an adjusted level 2 lockdown on Monday (31 May), following a spike in Covid-19 cases. In an address on Sunday evening,  Ramaphosa said that an increase in gatherings was directly responsible for the increased transmission, with funerals and school sporting events highlighted as particularly problematic. He said that the recommendations are based on the sustained increase in new cases in the last 14 days, increased hospital admissions in almost all provinces and an increase in the proportion of Covid tests that are positive. The president said that South Africans have also grown fatigued from more than a year of lockdowns and had grown lackadaisical in wearing and masks and practising social distancing. Further restrictions are being imposed to ensure the healthcare sector is not overwhelmed and to allow as many people as possible to be vaccinated before the pea of the third wave hits. The updated restrictions include: An evening curfew between 23h00 – 04h00;
Non-essential establishments such as restaurants and bars must close at 22h00 to allow staff to travel before curfew;
All gatherings are limited to 100 people indoors and 250 people outdoors;
Where a venue is too small to accommodate these people, then no more than 50% of the venue capacity can be used;
Funerals remain restricted to 100 people, while after-funeral gatherings remain prohibited.
Night vigils, after- funeral gatherings and ‘after-tears’ gatherings are not allowed. Read: The end of medical aids in South Africa – and other questions raised around the NHI