Huawei has taken the smartband market by storm with its latest entry – the Huawei Band 6. The Huawei Band 6 packs many smartwatch features into the smaller and more convenient form factor of a smartband, while offering a drastically-reduced price. Click here to get your Huawei Band 6. It also boasts an improved design, including a display that is 148% the size of its predecessor. This is thanks to a low-bezel design, and makes it easy to view important data and notifications. A common question from those who are interested in buying a smartband is whether there are long-term effects to wearing a digital device. This follows concerns that have been raised in public about the long-term effect of smartphone radiation on our bodies. John Sweetenham, a medical doctor and a hematologist at University of Utah’s Huntsman Cancer Institute, says these worries are unfounded. “I think right now there’s really no evidence that would support that there’s a problem there,” said Sweetenham. “Even if there was a very slight risk, maintaining a healthy lifestyle actually reduces your cancer risk.” The Huawei Band 6 is a powerhouse when it comes to driving a healthy lifestyle, offering 96 sports modes that include running, walking, swimming, and rowing machine workouts. It has smart sensors that will track all the important metrics, too, including your heart rate, the calories you have burned, and your exercise duration. It also boasts an exercise detection algorithm which recognizes the types of exercises you are doing based on how you are moving and what your heart rate is. If the Band 6 detects that you are maintaining a medium-to-high-intensity level of activity, it will ask if you are running, walking, or using an exercise machine. You then simply tap on the correct exercise to begin tracking it. Additionally, the Huawei Band 6 offers all-day SpO2 monitoring to ensure your blood oxygen levels stay within a safe range – while TruSleep 2.0 identifies the duration and quality of your sleep, and provides sleep quality advice based on this feedback. The Huawei Band 6 is now available in South Africa for just R1,699. If you buy your Huawei Band 6 now from Huawei’s online store, you will also receive a free gift worth R199. Click here to get your Huawei Band 6.