Whether you are at home or at work, Wi-Fi coverage is a key part of daily life. Unfortunately, with many Wi-Fi solutions – both across homes and businesses – keeping a reliable connection can be a big problem as you move around the premises. If you’ve ever been on a WhatsApp call which suddenly suffered deteriorated quality because you’d switched room, you’ll understand the importance of a comprehensive, powerful mesh WiFi solution. This is why ASUS has developed its ZenWiFi product range and AiMesh technology. Click here to learn more about ASUS’s ZenWiFi product range. ASUS ZenWiFi devices are designed to connect to each other to provide large mesh networks that boast great Wi-Fi coverage across your entire home or office. These network devices are incredibly easy to set up, as the AiMesh technology allows you to automatically sync all nodes at once – meaning you don’t need to configure each node individually. This is incredibly valuable as it means you don’t have to bring in expensive installation experts who interrupt your home or work time with their set-up routines. ASUS ZenWiFi also work with a vast range of AiMesh-compatible ROG and ASUS routers, and if you ever need to extend your home network you can simply add more compatible nodes and routers – which are installable in a matter of seconds. Another problem that many multi-node network solutions often encounter is that you are forced to use the same node until you completely lose connection to it, which means you are often connected to a sub-optimal node when a far better connection is available. With ASUS ZenWiFi’s innovative mesh network technology, however, your laptops, tablets, and smartphones will automatically switch between nodes depending on which offers the best connection. This means you will always be getting the best possible connectivity – no matter where you are in your home or office. It is incredibly important that your mesh network doesn’t result in reduced security, and it mustn’t make network management difficult. Whether you want to ensure your children are watching suitable content at the right times, or want to manage how employees use your Wi-Fi connection – it is crucial that your mesh network offers comprehensive management and security options. This is why all ASUS ZenWiFi devices come with ASUS’s groundbreaking AiProtection Classic technology, which is powered by TrendMicro and offers valuable features such as: Malicious site blocking – AiProtection uses Trend Micro’s cloud database to identify and block known malicious sites, preventing infection even before you click. The protection is more precise than normal DNS-based filtering because it detects and blocks specific URLs rather than generic domain names.
Infected device detection and blocking – If an already-infected device connects to your ASUS router with AiProtection, it will detect this and block that device’s connection with the malicious server. The list of malicious servers stays in sync with Trend Micro’s cloud database.
Parental controls – Key tools include a content filter that allows you to block categories of apps and websites (including a kid-safe preset), schedule block time that allows you to choose when different users and devices may access the Internet, and an Internet activity dashboard that lets you view each user’s Internet activity – including the type of content they’re viewing, and when their usage peaks.
24/7 auto update – AiProtection stays in sync with Trend Micro’s cloud database to get the latest signatures for the Intrusion Prevention System, Malicious Site Blocking, Infected Device Detection and Blocking, and Content Filter features.
Protected connections – WPA2 encryption and TLS protocols mean that your connections are protected and private. These features make the ASUS ZenWiFi product range perfect both for business and home networks. Here are two popular ASUS ZenWiFi products that will both offer reliable and fast connectivity across your entire premises. The ASUS ZenWiFi AX range is the most powerful mesh Wi-Fi device on the market. It offers extremely fast and stable Wi-Fi speeds, and significantly expands your Wi-Fi coverage area – making it perfect for homes and small businesses who need the best Wi-Fi network possible. This amazing connectivity is powered by AiRadar 2.0, which is a beamforming technology that uses AI to strengthen wireless signals intelligently. It also boasts a special antenna design that results in superior connectivity and range. You can connect a single ASUS ZenWiFi AX XT8 device to your router or connect several together for increased coverage depending on your needs. The AC Mini CD6 is a great alternative to the AX XT8, and is 30% smaller and lighter than its closest competitor. It boasts impressive performance and four antennas to ensure superior coverage while offering speeds of up to 867Mbps. You can choose between using a single AC Mini CD6 device – which covers up to 167 square metres – or bundles that include two or three of these devices and can cover up to 325 square metres and 465 square metres respectively. You can also connect them to other ASUS ZenWiFi products – such as the AX XT8 – to provide an even larger mesh network. Click here to learn more about ASUS’s ZenWiFi product range. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span>