The Department of Basic Education says it has successfully implemented the Presidential Youth Employment Stimulus which commenced in December 2020, creating over 300,000 jobs at schools across the country. The department said that the programme also helped save over 25,950 School Governing Body (SGB) funded posts in public and government subsidised independent schools. These posts came under threat due to schools experiencing financial distress, as a result of parents not being able to pay school fees, because of the economic devastation of Covid-19, it said. “The Basic Education sector created employment opportunities for a total of 319,091 education and general education assistants between the ages of 18 and 35 in the country. “The programme, whose aim was to use direct public investment to create opportunities for employment and to provide support to workers negatively impacted by the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic, comes to an end on 31 March 2021.” The department said that more than 868,000 applications were received from young people when the initiative was started. Of the 300,000 successful candidates, 200,000 were education assistants and 100,000 were general school assistants. Education Assistants will support teachers in the classroom and provide extra support to learners. General school assistants will help schools to comply with Covid-19 protocols while ensuring that teaching and learning take place in a safe, secure and hygienic environment. Recruitment primarily took place at the community level, with schools required to prioritise candidates living near the school. The DBE said it partnered with Harambee Youth Employment Accelerator to digitise the recruitment processes across the provinces. “The Harambee Youth Employment Accelerator helped with the recruitment processes in seven of the nine provinces, through the SAYouth.mobi site. “An added benefit of using the SAYouth.mobi site is that it is able to match job seekers to additional employment opportunities, in line with their interests and qualifications,” it said. Read: Government workers demand an 80% increase in their minimum wage – and at least R36,000 in Covid-19 ‘danger pay’