Ex-Gauteng residents and semigrants from other South African provinces are buying more properties in the Western Cape than ever before, says Alexa Horne, managing director of Dogon Group Properties who adds that an increasing number of South Africans are relocating to Cape Town and snapping up properties close to good schools, amenities, and lifestyle offerings. “Semigration to the Cape is by no means a new trend, however it is one that is sharply on the rise due to Covid-19 which has birthed a new era of remote working – making it easier for professionals to live, work and play in their preferred province – no longer having to wait until they retire to live by the sea.” “The allure of the Cape has long been pulling professionals who in the past would commute to Gauteng in the week for work and return to their families in the Western Cape each weekend. The need to keep working away from the family and to commute was a draw-back and a reason that more people were not relocating to the Cape.” Now, remote working, online work login’s, Google Meet, and Zoom have made it so much easier for families to pursue their dream of moving to Cape Town, said Horne. The main reasons for this swell of relocations are people looking for a lifestyle change and wanting quality of life in beautiful surroundings, as well as good schooling for their children and increased safety and security in general. Cape Town boasts some of the best schools in the country as well as access to what are undoubtedly some of the most beautiful beaches in the world, as well as mountains, vineyards, open spaces – the list goes on. “We are seeing that many of those relocating are looking for larger homes – houses that are big enough to accommodate extended family – like grandparents – as well as provide space for a home office.” “Out of our sales in the Western Cape over the past 12 months, Gauteng buyers and people from other provinces within SA make up as a large percentage of our clients. We are seeing more and more buyers looking in the Southern Suburbs and this has given rise to several new developments being launched in this desirable area,” said Paul Upton, head of developments for Dogon. Amongst these are Robinson Oaks and The Summerley in Kenilworth Upper, The Chesterfield in Rondebosch, Herschelwood in Claremont Upper, Firdale, Villandrie, and Kildare Lane in Newlands, the boutique Bordeaux Development in Constantia featuring two luxurious homes only, and Bishops Village in Bishopscourt. “In addition to these there is also the recently launched Steenberg Green Estate. We have received so many enquiries about Steenberg Green from ex-Gauteng residents as it is an ultra-exclusive security estate that boast some of the most sophisticated security measures in Cape Town. Whilst often the norm in Gauteng, security estates are limited in Cape Town, and semigrators are looking for the peace of mind offered through reliable state-of-the-art security,” said Upton. Other areas garnering interest from relocating families is the Western Seaboard – covering suburbs such as Tableview, Blouberg, Big Bay, West Beach, Sunningdale, Parklands etc. “The western Seaboard area offers those wanting to relocate from Gauteng a full-hearted lifestyle, said Natalie Koch, Dogon Group sales agent for the area. “This widespread area has a large amount of possibilities with regards to housing – with new developments, existing free standing homes and apartments available.” Parklands offers 3 bedroomed, 2 bathroom homes with gardens with prices ranging from R1.8 million to R2.2 million. Parklands North has modern homes ranging from R1.6 million for a 2 bedroom home up to R5 million for a larger home. For those wanting to be near to the beach, the Tableview, Blouberg stretch has spacious 3 bedroom homes with sea views, or within walking distance to the beach, from R3.8 million up to R5.5 million.” And it is not just sales that are booming thanks to the influx of families relocating to Cape Town. According to Horne, one of the reasons that Cape Town’s rentals market is doing so well is that semigrants often rent initially while they ascertain which area they want to live in and search for the perfect home to buy. “These professionals often have large monthly budgets to spend on rental and are looking for family homes in upmarket areas,” said Horne. As an example, Dogon Properties recently secured a rental of R75,000 on a home in Tamboerskloof. One of our Atlantic Seaboard Agents, JP Fourie, concluded 21 rental deals in November and December alone – one of which was for R85,000 per month for a Camps Bay residence. A Southern Suburbs Rental agent concluded 2 deals during the month of January, one at R87,000 in Upper Claremont and another in Constantia at R80,000 per month. Horne and Upton agree that the relocation of people from other provinces to the Western Cape, Cape Town in particular, is a trend that does not look set to die out any time soon and that it has shaped, and will continue to shape, the real-estate landscape in the province as more developments and offerings are tailored to suite the wants and needs of these new residents. Read: This coastal area in South Africa is seeing more ‘semigration’ buyers