William Mzimba is chief executive officer at Vodacom Business Group, where he is responsible for Vodacom’s enterprise units in Africa, leading a team tasked with driving digital transformation in targeted industries and markets. Vodacom Business Group is the B2B unit of the Vodacom Group, which consists of B2B fixed and mobile, Internet of Things, Cloud & Hosting, Wholesale and Carrier Services and Security businesses. Prior to Vodacom, Mzimba served as CEO and chairman at Accenture Africa. In that role he oversaw the growth and strategy of the business. During his 18-year career at Accenture, Mzimba worked in various industries government, utilities, retail, banking & insurance. He advised clients on their business strategies, helped to transform their businesses and built technology platforms. Mzimba holds an MBA, BA (Honours) in Business Studies, Management Advancement Programme (MAP) and diploma in Datametrics and has a proven track record in leveraging technology as a business enabler to drive results, as well as implementing successful strategies in growing businesses. In this episode of Business Talk, Mzimba tells Michael Avery how Vodacom Business has aligned its strategy around the government’s response to Covid-19, and new digital native businesses that have emerged in South Africa in recent years, creating and up-scaling its digital platform to create a thriving ecosystem for SMEs. The aim for Vodacom Business is to create an all-inclusive financial services capability for customers which includes new capabilities like VodaTrade and VodaPay. He said that the recent announcement of a ‘super app‘ will enhance this ecosystem even further. The group announced plans for a super app in July last year, to allow consumers to shop online, pay bills and send money, in partnership with digital payment provider Alipay. The full interview is embedded below. You can find all the Business Talk with Michael Avery interviews here. <span style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" data-mce-type="bookmark" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span>