Five years on, Openserve has become South Africa’s leading network infrastructure provider and is committed to delivering the ultimate broadband experience and offering even more value to its customers. We have more than 2.4 million households covered with fibre either directly to the home (FTTH) or to the cabinet (FTTC), with a national coverage spanning metros, urban areas, small towns and townships. But more than having the widest footprint across SA, we will in the near future announce our exciting fibre expansion plans to provide FTTH services to the entire FTTC footprint. Openserve continues to work relentlessly at offering the customer the best value and best network experience. Click here to learn more about how Openserve provides incredible value to its customers. With the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic and national lockdown, there was a significant demand for reliable internet connectivity, and this has continued to grow as more people are working and learning from home indefinitely. We understood more than ever how critical it was to ensure that as many South African’s got connected and stayed connected as possible. During the peak period of the pandemic, we doubled speeds for free on our network, introduced symmetrical speeds to our fibre portfolio, and increased sync profiles. Openserve even offered numerous incentives including discounted or free installations. We launched and enhanced our various offerings to provide customers with affordable internet connectivity options through our Openserve Fibre Connect, Openserve Pure Connect and Openserve Copper Connect product suites. In addition to this, from 1 March 2021, Openserve will introduce further speed upgrades and price changes on our Openserve Fibre Connect and Openserve Copper Connect product offerings. Price reductions for Openserve Pure connect will be introduced on 1 April 2021. As part of the speed upgrade, there will be no additional costs from Openserve impacting ISP partners that are directly related to this initiative. This is because we are offering our ISP partners incentives to upgrade their customers. In support of our fibre roll out strategy – that of providing high quality, future-proof broadband connectivity to all customers – we are continuing to upgrade Openserve customers currently within the Openserve fibre footprint from their current technology onto our fibre network. This will improve efficiencies and allow more South Africans to have access to affordable broadband. Openserve is also offering further incentives to ease the transition process onto the Openserve fibre network for the impacted customers. We are encouraged by the positive feedback and excitement of our ISP partners on these new propositions. Currently the price per Gigabyte of data that end-users pay over fixed broadband connections compare very favourably to mobile data offers, even when compared to limited time promotional offers from mobile providers. The table below compares the per Gig price a user on Openserve fibre would pay on a typical uncapped package from an ISP, to a typical promotional mobile data deal. This example is based on current ISP pricing of uncapped packages in the market. The price per Gigabyte rate over our fixed Broadband is expected to drop even more once the price changes alluded to above, take effect and are passed on to end-users. In addition to competitive per gigabyte rates, fixed broadband users generally have a more reliable and consistent user experience than mobile broadband users. *It is important to note that on Openserve fibre, the user could use more than 1TB resulting in an even lower per Gig rate. Openserve launched a self-service app in November 2020 which enables customers to manage their broadband network connection and internet service at a push of a button. The Openserve Connect App, which is available in Android and IOS, puts self-service capabilities in the hands of the customer, allowing potential and existing customers to engage with Openserve directly in order to get their homes connected to the Openserve Broadband network. A platform that puts the customer’s connected home as a priority. As the leader in Open Access broadband connectivity in South Africa, we are committed to finding new and innovative ways of enabling the flow of information and will continue to work closely with our ISP partners to ensure that together we enable a world-class connected experience for the customer at their home. We encourage all customers on Openserve infrastructure, copper or fibre, to download the Openserve Connect App to check whether their line has been upgraded as per our communication. The app has also become a channel through which customers can influence the future roll-out out of fibre in their respective areas by registering their interest on the App. We remain focused on connecting as many South Africans as possible to our and to enhancing their internet experience through our reliable connectivity and high-speed networks.