The Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) says that it is facing strike action from driving schools at various Driving Licence Testing Centres (DLTCs) in Gauteng. The online system was first introduced in 2018 as a means of cutting down on long queues and eliminating corruption. However, the system has faced a number of complaints around difficulties to book slots and system downtime. The National Driving School Association of South Africa told 702 that the strike will focus on scrapping the online driving licence system as it has ‘failed to work’ for driving schools and other members of the public. “The main problem is the online booking, it is giving us a serious problem,” said Abel Mositsa, chairman of the National Driving School Association of South Africa “We have approached the relevant departments so that they can assist and it looks like these people are not interested in our issues. That’s why we are marching to the Department of Transport and RTMC as well.” Mositsa said that the strike will take place on Friday (5 March), as well as on Monday and Tuesday next week where a memorandum of issues will be handed over to transport officials. The RTMC warned that the strike could disrupt services on these days. “Whilst the RTMC recognises their democratic right to protest, we strongly condemn action that disrupts the delivery of much needed services. “The RTMC assures members of the public that it remains its’ top priority to support the Gauteng Department of Transport to eradicate corruption whilst providing an efficient booking service to members of the public.” The RTMC said it has received numerous enquiries from concerned members of the public who are struggling to get slots at DLTCs near them for renewals and booking. “(We wish) to assure them that the Corporation is working tirelessly to stabilise the platform and make sure, in consultation with the province that all hurdles are cleared to create a seamless booking experience.” Read: Why taxis in South Africa are allowed 100% capacity – but airlines have to block some rows off