The Institute for Security Studies (ISS) has published a new evidence-based policing guide, which it says can help reduce crime in South Africa based on international best practices. The group noted a worrying increase in violent crime for the last quarter of 2020, including for murder, attempted murder, aggravated robbery and rape. It added that murder levels started rising in 2012, with no successful interventions put in place to stop them. To combat this trend of failure, it has been proposed that the police force adopts an evidence-based approach to policing, which would see a complete shift in how we think about policing. “Evidence-based policing can be a confusing concept because of the word evidence. For police, evidence has always meant the collection of information or clues that help solve a crime. But in evidence-based policing, ‘evidence’ is the best existing research about what police activities work, and what don’t,” the ISS said. “Evidence-based policing is not a ‘model’ to replace other ‘models’. Rather, it is about a shift in how we think about policing and safety. It is the recognition that if an activity or tactic is intended to achieve a particular outcome, there must be a clear link between the activity or tactic and the intended results. ” The ISS noted that police officers have few incentives to admit error, ask questions, or innovate in their jobs. Reward is earned through actions such as vehicles searched or suspects arrested, with the assumption that this improves safety. “And yet, despite the vast number of policing activities purportedly carried out by the SAPS each year, violent crime remains endemic. A change in organisational culture, one that embraces failure as a learning opportunity, could improve things,” it said. The ISS said that its evidence-based policing guide shows how police can learn from failure, and summarises lessons from elsewhere in the world. Evidence-based policing recognises that experience and intuition are crucial, but that policing should also be informed by research that tests our ideas or beliefs, it said. “Officials are meant to create crime plans, execute them, evaluate them and adapt them. But the performance and operational environment doesn’t make this practically possible. “Instead, when the process occurs, it’s often a paper exercise. This is the antithesis of learning – it is like policing in the dark.” The group outlined some of the proven methods of policing – primarily from the UK – which could be applied locally to bring better outcomes to crime prevention. The full document, embedded below, covers the full spectrum of policing techniques, and how effective they have been in facilitating crime prevention outcomes.  Read: What you need to know about South Africa’s latest crime stats