In 2019, well known author Mark Phillips and his team launched Mindbourne – a brand-new range of Mathematics and Advanced Programme Mathematics textbooks. The team also developed an online video portal containing videos covering all the content in these books. Click here to learn more about Mindbourne. Mark’s vision for Mindbourne was birthed out of the realisation that the use of technology and online learning is fast becoming the new paradigm in education. Educational principles such as differentiated learning, problem-solving and the flipped classroom approach can now be realised through the powerful medium of online tools. Mindbourne’s vision is to create educational products that align with this new educational methodology. The Mindbourne textbooks are based on the current syllabi for both the IEB and DBE. The online video lessons allow learners to study certain topics online, enabling teachers to complete the syllabus earlier and have more time for revision at the end of the year. The examination focus exercises at the end of each chapter contain a large variety excellent revision and challenge examination-type questions that will prepare learners in their preparation for the final examination. Learners can attempt these exercises and then check their answers using the video lessons, under the control of the teacher. Teachers can also motivate learners to use the video lessons by creating online tasks that count for marks, based on their customised lesson plans. Mindbourne currently offers textbooks for Grades 10-12, while its Grade 8 and 9 textbooks will launch in June 2021. The video lessons allow for differentiated learning. This means that the stronger learners can work ahead of the class by using the video portal at the discretion of the teacher, while weaker learners can use the video lessons to master the basics. Learners who are absent for classes can catch up lessons online, and these video lessons are also valuable for revision purposes. The video portal has a teacher control facility which allows teachers to control which lessons may be viewed by learners to prevent them from abusing the system by copying homework solutions from the portal. The teacher resource portal contains a variety of examination questions and marking guidelines which teachers can access. These questions are available in the different fonts used by the DBE and IEB, as well as in Word format for easy editing. New questions will be added to the portal every year. Supplementary notes are available which contain additional notes as well as practice and extension questions. For example, the laws of logs will soon be included in the IEB. There are notes and questions on this topic in the resource portal. Advanced Programme (AP) Mathematics is an additional enrichment course studied by learners wishing to pursue tertiary courses requiring a sound knowledge of Mathematics. The course offers advanced topics such as Calculus, Statistics and Mathematical Modelling. The Academy also offers a three-year course in AP Mathematics starting from Grade 10. In Grade 12, learners are required to write a final examination set by the IEB, and learners who pass the course will receive a certificate from the IEB which can be included with applications to study at university. This article was published in partnership with Mindbourne.