In a recently held Temenos LevelUp webinar that discusses the importance of a customer onboarding journey for banks, based on the “10 tips for a highly effective onboarding experience” whitepaper, you can learn a few key practices that can be easily implemented to simplify and improve a bank’s effectiveness of customer onboarding. Click here to download the whitepaper. While developing an effective onboarding experience may seem overwhelming, it doesn’t have to be – and this whitepaper is a must-read for anybody working on the customer experience journey within the financial sector. Although, many of these tips may seem simple, they are proven to provide impressive results and Temenos has helped countless financial institutions improve their customer onboarding by answering the following customer-centric questions: Are the solutions aligned to customer needs? Is the onboarding process easy and convenient for customers? Once the customer has been onboarded, is the ongoing service experience what they expected so they say? In this webinar, Temenos Chief Experience Officer, Derek Corcoran presents “Best Practices” that ensure an effective onboarding, origination and acquisition process and overall customer journey experience. He walks the viewer through the information in a way that is easy to understand and, given that Derek Corcoran wrote the whitepaper – there is no one better to discuss the content. Following Corcoran’s presentation, Temenos Head of Digital for the MEA region, Javier Hermida provides further practical examples of how Temenos has helped banks build streamlined and digital-first customer onboarding experiences. Hermida’s presentation offers great value to South African organisations as it provides real-world examples from regional references – making these tips work practically. Temenos recommends that, before you even start redesigning your customer experience, crafting wireframes, or even looking at your competitors’ customer experience journeys, you focus on Corcoran’s 10 simple tips to significantly impact the growth and profitability of your bank by improving the effectiveness of your customer acquisition, sales, onboarding and origination journeys and achieve real, tangible results.. These tips are proven to be the best way to run a customer onboarding strategy in the banking sector, and should therefore, form the basis of your successful customer journey strategy. Watch the webinar now – click here.