The Department of Transport plans to further regulate microdots as a means of tracking and identifying cars in South Africa. The proposal is included alongside a number of other changes in the National Road Traffic Amendment Bill, which is currently being considered in parliament. Microdots have seen increasing popularity as a safety feature on South African vehicles. They are classified as a particle with a diameter smaller than 1.8 mm which bears a unique, optically readable microdot identifier. This typically includes the vehicle’s 17-digit VIN number or another registered PIN. The Automobile Association of South Africa has raised questions about the necessity of regulations around microdots – and noted a lack of detail in the proposed bill about their usage. In a presentation to parliament this week, the association said that microdot security technology has been available in South Africa -along with many other security features – such as high security locks, electronic alarm/immobilisers, and satellite tracking – for a number of years. “(There are) no reasons provided for development of microdot legislation nor whether any research has been conducted to support implementation of new regulations – if the research has been conducted, we believe that should be made public and open to scrutiny.” The group added that it was premature to link the economic value of microdots to the National Road Traffic Act, and there are concerns that private companies producing microdots run the risk of deregistration given that no clear guidelines for registration have been published. “Because the guidelines will be published in regulations it also places them beyond parliamentary scrutiny – therefore operating at the pleasure of the minister of Transport,” it said. Tracking Transport director-general Alec Moemi has said that the proposed changes are important not only to regulate microdots but because the government is looking to use the technology to track cars in the country. “We are looking at a new system that will include the embedding of microdots into a new number plate, that will then be regulated,” he said in an October 2020 briefing. “Manufacturers, as well as those that print out and issue them to motor vehicle owners (will also be regulated) so that number of plates that are forged will be easily identified.” Moemi said that technology that is currently employed across the country’s highways, especially in Gauteng and Cape Town, as well as at the country’s borders will be able to scan these micro-dots. Similar technology can also be deployed to scan vehicles that travel under highway bridges. In addition to the benefits around road safety and crime, Moemi said that the new system will also allow the government to better understand road usage across the country. The National Road Traffic Amendment Bill also aims to regulate microdots in South Africa and how they are used in the private sector – including new registration requirements for manufacturers. Read: The problem with having a zero-percent alcohol limit for drivers in South Africa – and what can be done to solve it