The South African alcohol industry has made recommendations to the government through Nedlac, ahead of expected discussions around proposals to implement stricter lockdown over the Easter weekend. Health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize confirmed this week that the National Coronovirus Command Council had received an advisory that lockdown in South Africa be elevated over the Easter weekend, to mitigate the risk of super-spreader events and an early onset of the third Covid-19 wave in the country. While reports have pointed to proposals for extended curfew, travel controls, and alcohol sale restrictions, businesses have warned against going this route as it would cause even more damage to an already-battered tourism and alcohol sector. Instead, the South African Liquor Brandowners Association (SALBA) has presented its own ‘alternative’ lockdown proposals, which it said will deal with short-term pressure on hospitals during the next Covid-19 surge, while maintaining economic viability. “The industry believes that measures to alleviate the impact on the healthcare system can be implemented in a less damaging manner that helps to mitigate transmission while still helping to preserve livelihoods,” it said. SALBA said that these recommendations include responding speedily and pro-actively in respect of the Easter Weekend by: Reinstating the 23h00 – 04h00 curfew;
Reducing permitted numbers for gatherings to a 50% of capacity and a maximum of 50 people indoors and 100 people outdoors;
Interprovincial travel should not be prohibited to protect the economic recovery and growth in the tourism and hospitality sector;
Alcohol sales should continue under current licence conditions, with restrictions being introduced only if hospital capacity becomes severely stretched. Sibani Mngadi, chairperson of SALBA, said the pandemic and alcohol bans have brought the alcohol industry and any associated problems of alcohol harm into sharp focus. “While it is undeniable that some people have an unhealthy relationship with alcohol that could lead to harmful behaviour, to single out alcohol as the root of all trauma is wrong. “Weighed against the evidence, the negative impact of a further blanket ban on alcohol seems unjustifiable,” he said. To ascribe the drop in trauma admissions to the alcohol bans, one also has to control for the influence of all the other imposed regulatory changes such as the curfew and restrictions on gatherings, he said. “Alcohol restrictions were imposed at the same time as the curfew, so it is thus disingenuous to suppose that the decline in trauma cases was due to solely the alcohol ban. “The Covid-19 pandemic has had a devastating impact on both lives and livelihoods in South Africa which all social partners have a responsibility to mitigate and address. “The entire industry and its value chain have been irreparably damaged, and the toll on livelihoods in the liquor value chain has been significant, leading to the closure of businesses, loss of jobs and income, and a decline in investment.” Read: Advisory committee calls for harder lockdown over Easter weekend in South Africa