Duxbury Networking has won the HPE Aruba Distributor of the Year award for the sixth consecutive year. These prestigious awards provide HPE’s concrete recognition of its partners for their outstanding performance and accomplishments that help to raise the standard for business excellence and customer satisfaction. Click here to learn more about Duxbury Networking. “Winners are chosen for their excellent financial performance, innovative solutions and for driving meaningful business results for shared customers. We are thrilled to once again be acknowledged as one of the sector winners in these benchmark awards,” says Warren Gordon, Business Unit Manager at Duxbury Networking – distributors of Aruba technology. Gordon attributes Duxbury’s success to a number of factors that include the leadership of the company’s founder and CEO – Graham Duxbury. “The success of any organisation hinges on how the management guides and focus the entire team. Graham Duxbury is a perfect example of the ‘lead by example’ credo which, in his case, means seeking opportunities; working hard; gaining an intimate knowledge of the brands we sell; and ensuring that excellent, ongoing customer service is a non-negotiable part of each employee’s work ethic from pre-sales, right through to aftermarket support.” Gordon says that Duxbury has focused on the Aruba brand since being appointed as a preferred distributor in Southern Africa, allowing the technical team to become highly qualified in their knowledge of the various Aruba offerings. “The Aruba brand has grown exponentially in South Africa since its inception and our support team has grown in both capacity and capabilities to match this development arc. Our team of engineers has admirable levels of technical expertise, gaining them the accolade of having the highest levels of Aruba certification for a distribution company team in South Africa. They are available to discuss design solutions, assist with the implementation of bespoke solutions, and provide guidance and assistance to customer teams.” For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za. This article was published in partnership with Duxbury Networking.