Most employers and employees in South Africa greeted last month’s Budget Speech with a sense of relief, says Yolandi Esterhuizen, registered tax practitioner & director: Product Compliance, Sage Africa & Middle East. Against all odds, government managed to provide for a large scale Covid-19 vaccination campaign without needing to introduce significant new tax increases, Indeed, the Budget avoids increasing the tax burden by withdrawing the R40 billion tax measures previously announced, she said. The above-inflation personal tax relief is especially welcome to struggling households. “That’s not to say we’re out of the woods yet – debt levels are high and much depends on whether government can hold the line against public-sector unions’ demands for above-inflation wage hikes,” said Esterhuizen. Sage has highlighted seven things to look out for as we move into a new tax year: 1. No major developments on National Health Insurance (NHI) In real terms, Treasury has cut the funding allocated to the Department of Health. This is perhaps surprising in the year of a pandemic, said said Esterhuizen. In addition, finance minister Tito Mboweni didn’t mention the migration to NHI in his Budget Speech. Treasury’s budget documents for the year simply state the following recommendation: “The National Treasury, together with the Department of Health, should ensure that adequate resources are made available to expedite the implementation of NHI to ensure that the implementation of the much needed universal access to healthcare services is achieved for the benefit of the poor and vulnerable, especially during the Covid-19 pandemic.” This indicates that we may still need to wait a while longer to learn more about how the NHI will be funded and how it will work in practice, said Esterhuizen. 2. National Minimum Wage and the BCEA earnings threshold have increased Separately from the budget, the government announced increases to the National Minimum Wage earlier this year. Government has needed to walk a fine line between the financial pressures companies are facing during the pandemic and the impact of high food inflation on low-income earners, said Sage. The National Minimum Wage has increased as follows: From R20.76 per hour to R21.69 per hour for most workers.
Farm workers’ minimum wage has been aligned with the national minimum wage, up from R18.68.
For domestic workers, a hike of almost 23% from R15.57 per hour to R19.09 per hour. Government plans to align this with the national minimum wage by next year.
From R11.42 to R11.93 per hour for workers employed on the expanded public works programme.
Learners who concluded learnership agreements are entitled to the allowance determined by the national qualifications framework level. Employers should ensure their payroll systems are up to date. Some sectors have different wage regulating measures (sectoral determinations, bargaining council agreements or collective agreements) which might be more beneficial to the worker– employees who fall under these regulating measures should be paid accordingly. In addition to the increase in the National Minimum Wage, the BCEA (Basic Conditions of Employment) earnings threshold was increased from R205 433.30 per annum to R211 596.30 with effect from March 2021. Employees earning more than the threshold are excluded from certain provisions of the BCEA and the LRA (Labour Relations Act). 3. Changes to tax treatment of bursaries for employees’ relatives If an employee’s remuneration for the previous year (remuneration proxy) was above R600,000, then the full amount of the bursary is taxable, irrespective of the value of the bursary. If the employee’s remuneration proxy was R600,000 or less and the bursary is granted, then: The first R20,000 per year (R30 000 if the family member has a disability) of the bursary is exempt if it is for basic education (up to NQF level 4);
Or the first R60 000 per year (R90,000 if the family member has a disability) of the bursary is exempt if it is for higher education (NQF level 5-10). However, from March 2021, if the employee’s remuneration package includes bursaries or scholarships as an element of salary sacrifice, the above exemption is not allowed, Esterhuizen pointed out. Employers are advised to let their employees know about the tax implications before their payroll run in March. Some employers may have to review their package structures to accommodate this amendment, she said. 4. No tax increases In a year in which we braced for the worst, it was welcome to hear that personal income tax brackets and rebates will increase 5%, which is just above the inflation rate of 4%. This means most people will be paying slightly less income tax in real terms, with most of the relief going to low and middle-income earners. 5. UIF limit increase “I was pleased to see a proposal to increase the UIF earning contribution ceiling to R17,712 per month from R14,872 per month with effect from 1 March 2021. However, although March was mentioned in the budget speech, it is important to note that the effective date should still be announced and indicated in a Government Gazette,” said Esterhuizen. The maximum monthly contribution will increase from R148.72 for both the employee and employer to R177.12. Sage had called for this change ahead of the Budget because we believed it would be sensible to align the contribution limit and the benefits limit. It is also wise to raise contributions at a time of rising unemployment claims, the group said. 6. Home office tax deductions and travel “It’s good news that National Treasury will review the current travel and home office allowances, starting with consultations during 2021/2022. The pandemic has triggered a massive shift to working from home, and we can expect remote work to be a feature of the workforce even when the worst of the Covid-19 crisis is over. “We would welcome moves to ensure that travel and home office allowances are adjusted to be more fair and simpler in tax years to come,” said Esterhuizen. 7. Retirement funding changes The compulsory annuitisation of provident fund pay-outs is effective from 1 March 2021. This means members of a provident fund will be permitted to take up to a third of the retirement benefits as a lump sum and annuitise the remaining two-thirds. However, this is subject to certain conditions and exclusions, the tax expert said. Before 2016, provident fund members were not entitled to a tax deduction on their monthly contributions towards the fund, but now the tax treatment of contributions towards a pension, provident and retirement fund are aligned, she said. SARS calling The South African Revenue Service (SARS), meanwhile, is calling on employers to prepare data for the annual employers filing season. “SARS calls on employers to ensure that they are ready to submit their annual reconciliation declarations with the latest and most accurate payroll information about their employees and the tax they have deducted,” said the revenue service. The revenue service said it is committed to providing certainty and clarity to all taxpayers and traders regarding their tax and customs obligations so that they can remain compliant and to ensure that transacting with the organisation is as simple and easy as possible. However, the ease and simplicity of transactions with SARS depends on each segment of taxpayers, traders and third parties fulfilling their legal obligations to ensure a seamless service offering by SARS. “At the same time, SARS expects that providers of third party information from institutions who administer medical aid schemes, retirement annuities and others also provide the latest and accurate information to make it easy for taxpayers who are required to file an income tax return,” said the revenue service. The data that must be submitted to SARS from employers should cover the Monthly Employer Declarations submitted, payments made and Tax Certificates (IRP5/IT3) (a)s generated, covering the full tax year from 1 March to 28/28 February. Information submitted by third parties should cover the same tax period. “From the side of employers, their payroll data is of vital importance to SARS. Firstly, it gives a reconciled account of what amounts of tax the employer deducted from the taxable remuneration of each of its employees. “Secondly, it shows what amount of tax the employer has paid to SARS on behalf of the employee. It also records other allowances that an employer pays to an employee as part of their remuneration benefits,” said the revenue service. Based on this payroll information and data from third parties, SARS will be able to issue an income tax return to taxpayers that is pre-populated with the relevant information for the ease and convenience of taxpayers who do not have complex tax affairs. “For these taxpayers, filing a return becomes a simple matter of checking that all the information pre-populated on the return is correct and then submitting the return to SARS.” Employers and third parties have from 1 April to 31 May to submit their data to SARS. Read: Multichoice supports calls for a household ‘TV tax’ in South Africa