The Reserve Bank’s monetary policy meeting will take place on Thursday (25 March), with South Africa’s repo rate expected to be maintained at a record low according to analysts. In a research note on Tuesday (23 March), Nedbank economists said that the focus of the meeting will be on the anticipated inflation outlook and the SARB’s economic growth forecasts relative to potential output. “Inflation is expected to gradually edge higher in 2021, off the low base established in 2020. We expect inflation to average around 4.5% over the next three years,” Nedbank said. It added that the SARB’s inflation forecasts presented in January will probably be revised upwards, mainly due to global oil price developments since the last meeting. “Furthermore, the output gap is likely to narrow in the years ahead as the economy recovers from the pandemic’s shock. The MPC has indicated that monetary policy is already stimulatory and reiterated that only significant structural reforms could lift growth and employment.” Nedbank said that a further 25 basis-points-rate-cut is also unlikely to add any further meaningful stimulus given that the yield curve remains extremely steep as investors are pricing in South Africa’s higher risk premium due to the dismal fiscal position at the longer end of the curve. Based on all these considerations, Nedbank said that rates are likely to remain unchanged. A poll of economists conducted by Reuters agreed with this assessment, stating that the Reserve Bank will keep its repo rate at a record low of 3.5% at its 25 March meeting and at that same level until early 2022. All but one economist out of 25 polled in the past week said the Reserve Bank would hold interest rates at 3.5%. The lone voice predicted a 25 basis points cut next week. The South African Reserve Bank is expected to hold the repo rate steady in 2021, and then raise it by 25 basis points in January or March 2022, with another quarter percentage point hike in the second half of next year, economists forecast. “Even then, a 25 basis points hike is within limits and would demonstrate that the SARB is considerate of the persistent economic weakness,” said Mamello Matikinca-Ngwenya, chief economist at FNB. She expects a rise to just 3.75% in 2022. “Inflation remains benign around the 4.5% mid-point in 2021 and 2022 and only becomes a concern in 2023,” she said. The poll suggested inflation would average 4.1% this year and quicken to 4.3% next year. The SARB aims to keep inflation within a 3% to 6% range. Read: Government fast-tracks plan to introduce a basic income grant in South Africa