Transport minister Fikile Mbalula has published new transport rules for air travel under South Africa’s level 1 lockdown. In a gazette published on Monday (1 March), Mbalula said that international scheduled operations and charter flights carrying passengers are allowed at the following airports: OR Tambo International Airport;
King Shaka International Airport;
Cape Town International Airport. The gazette does not mention Kruger Mpumalanga International Airport or Lanseria International Airport which were specifically mentioned by the president on Sunday evening as being open for international travel. Mbalula said that long-haul flight departures and landings at these airports are permitted during the hours of curfew. However, the gazette states that passengers affected by these flights are required to present evidence of a flight ticket when stopped by law enforcement officers during curfew hours. An airline operator conducting an international flight is allowed to provide catering onboard the aircraft, provided that they take all risk mitigation, health and safety measures to contain the spread of Covid-19 including the provision of pre -packed meals. Domestic flights An operator conducting a domestic flight is not allowed to provide catering onboard the aircraft except bottled water. In addition, a passenger on a domestic flight is not allowed to eat onboard the aircraft. The gazette states that an airline operator may make available self-service complimentary magazines which passengers may pick up as they enter the aircraft. These magazines must not be shared amongst the passengers and if left behind by passengers after each use, must be safely disposed. Previously, domestic airlines were allowed to provide pre-packed meals for passengers as long as the production thereof adhered to Covid-19 protocols. Additionally, unlike international long-haul flights, domestic airlines are required to follow the curfew hours.  Read: 6 things you still can’t do under South Africa’s level 1 lockdown