The Democratic Alliance has called for an investigation into tens of thousands of public service employees who applied for the Special Relief of Distress (SRD) grant of R350 per month, initiated by the government to help the most destitute – those unable to meet their or their families’ most basic needs following the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic. The opposition party on Wednesday (24 March) called on the Social Security Agency of South Africa (SASSA) and the Department of Social Development (DSD) to urgently solicit the assistance of the Department of Public Service and Administration conclude the investigations into the public service employees who applied for the SRD grant, as well as the investigations into the 241 public service employees who received the SRD grant for the month of May 2020. “As of February 2021, an astonishing 39,672 public service employees had applied for the SRD grant. However, no disciplinary or legal action has been instituted against them as the SASSA-led investigations into their applications are still ongoing and have yet to be concluded,” the DA said. This was revealed by the minister of Social Development, Lindiwe Zulu, in a written response to a parliamentary question posed by the Democratic Alliance (DA). “Minister Zulu further disclosed that no legal steps have been taken to recover the grants paid to the 241public service employees who received the SRD grant for the month of May 2020 as the investigations into these payments are also still ongoing. A total amount of R84,350 was paid to public service employees who applied for the SRD grant for the month of May 2020,” the DA said. “While the DA welcomes the fact that DSD has since put systems in place to prevent public service employees from fraudulently and/or unlawfully applying for and/or receiving an SRD grant, and that SASSA has implemented a system to ensure that public service employees do not receive the SRD grant by matching the ID numbers of approved and new applicants for the grant against various databases such as the PERSAL and PERSOL databases, we are concerned that the investigations into the 39,672 implicated public service employees have yet to be concluded.” The political party called for decisive disciplinary and legal action t0 be taken against these public service employees. “The SRD grant is intended solely for the most vulnerable and distressed members of our society and should not be open to abuse by public service employees who are drawing a monthly salary from state coffers,” the DA said. The grant expired in January 2021, however the government said it would extend the payment system for an additional three months, to April 2021, having paid approximately 6.5 million recipients monthly since the grant opened last May. SASSA pointed out that the SRD grant is a temporary provision of assistance intended for persons in such dire material need that they are unable to meet their or their families’ most basic needs. It is paid to citizens or permanent residents, who have insufficient means and meet one or more of the following criteria: The applicant is awaiting payment of an approved social grant;
The applicant has been found medically unfit to undertake remunerative work for a period of less than 6 months;
The bread winner is deceased and application is made within three months of the date of death;
No maintenance is received from parent, child or spouse obliged in law to pay maintenance, and proof is furnished that efforts made to obtain maintenance have been unsuccessful;
The bread winner of that person`s family has been admitted to an institution funded by the state (prison, psychiatric hospital, state home for older persons, treatment centre for substance abuse or child and youth care centre);
The applicant has been affected by a disaster as defines in the Disaster Management Act or the Fund Raising Act, 1978;
The person is not receiving assistance from any other organisation or;
Refusal of the application for social relief of distress will cause undue hardships. Research conducted by Intellidex showed that government employees in the country earned an average of R393,000 in 2018/19. The report, which was commissioned by Business Unity South Africa (BUSA), uses the same calculations as the IMF – which considers the public sector as ‘general government’. This corresponds to South Africa’s national and provincial departments and public entities, but exclude local government and state-owned companies. Based on this consideration and data from Stats SA, the size of the public sector has risen by over 18% between 2010 and 2020, from a little over 1.8 million to a little under 2.2 million. Of these, about 50% are employed by departments in provincial government and 21% by departments in national government. Read: Government workers demand an 80% increase in their minimum wage – and at least R36,000 in Covid-19 ‘danger pay’