The Shoprite Group has announced its own mobile virtual network operator (MVNO) called K’nect mobile. The service will go online in April. Shoprite said that K’nect mobile’s key differentiator is its simplicity, with flat call and data rates, and no complicated tiers. The service piggybacks off the mobile network infrastructure of Cell C, whose roaming partnership with MTN provides coverage. The group said that airtime, data bundles and rewards only expire after 60 days, rather than the more common 30-day expiry. In addition, K’nect mobile will offer 100MB free data for three months. The group said that its call and data rates are among the most competitive in the country: 50c per minute all day K’nect to K’nect calls;
99c per minute all day calls to other networks;
15c per megabyte for any size data bundle, up to 1GB. K’nect mobile also offers the following rewards to Shoprite Xtra members: 10% free on recharge;
10% Xtra for Xtra Savings cardholders;
5% Xtra when recharging via Money Market Account;
Double airtime rewards on Xtra Savings airtime deals. Shoprite said that other rewards include early access to Computicket events and tickets, and 100MB free for three months, subject to in-store RICA and activation. “Importantly, customers using a K’nect mobile SIM card will also benefit from zero-rated data on selected Shoprite and Checkers websites and apps, including the Money Market Account, Computicket website and the Group’s jobs portal – all without incurring any data charges.” At the same time, the move will help the Shoprite Group streamline communication and drastically reduce its internal data costs, it said. Shoprite said its 141,000 employees are now able to receive communications directly on the group’s internal app, called SiyaRinga, without the need to reverse data costs. The network forms part of the group’s financial services offering, which enables customers to conveniently pay bills, buy cell phones, make money transfers, buy airtime and data, lotto tickets, electricity and even funeral insurance in partnership with OUTsurance. “K’nect mobile is part of our ever-growing suite of fintech products designed to better serve our customers,” said Jean Olivier, general manager of Financial Services. “We’ve spent a lot of time understanding how a mobile network can add value to our customers’ lives, and our solution is an easy to understand network that offers straightforward call and data rates as well as tangible rewards.” Read: Shoprite says it will launch its own virtual mobile network