Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma has published a new gazette that confirms the move to lockdown level 1, and the changes to some restrictions. The gazette gives effect to the national address given by president Cyril Ramaphosa on Sunday evening (28 February), in which he announced the relaxing of restrictions to help further open up the economy. Below are some of the key points of the level 1 lockdown, as outlined by the gazette. Curfew and movement of people Every person is confined to their place of residence from 00h00 until 04h00 daily, unless a person is performing an essential service or has an emergency. People travelling on late-night flights have also been given exemption. Any person who fails to abide by the new curfew commits an offence and is, on conviction, liable to a fine or a period of imprisonment not exceeding six months or to both a fine and imprisonment. Closing time for the following establishments, whether indoors or outdoors, is 23h00: Cinemas:
Theatres;
Casinos:
Museums, galleries and archives:
Public swimming pools;
Beaches and public parks;
Game parks, botanical gardens and zoos
Gyms and fitness centres;
Restaurants:
Venues hosting auctions:
Venues hosting professional sport;
Venues hosting faith-based, religious, social, political and cultural gatherings. Alcohol The sale of liquor by licensed premises for off-site consumption, is permitted during licenced trading hours, subject to the laws governing such licences. Liquor may also be sold by licensed premises for on-site consumption subject to strict adherence to the curfew. Mandatory protocols when in a public place The gazette defines a ‘face mask’ as a cloth face mask or a homemade item that covers the nose and mouth or another appropriate item to cover the nose and mouth. It states that the wearing of a face mask is mandatory for every person when in a public place. excluding a child under the age of six years. and any person who fails to comply with a verbal instruction by an enforcement officer to wear a face mask, commits an offence and is, on conviction. liable to a fine or a period of imprisonment not exceeding six months. In addition, no person will be allowed to do the following without wearing a mask: Use, operate, perform any service on any form of public transport;
Enter or be in a building. place or premises. including government buildings, places or premises, used by the public to obtain goods or services;
Be in any public open space, if he or she is not wearing a face mask. This does not apply to a person who undertakes vigorous exercise in a public place. provided that the person maintains a distance of at least one and a half metres from any other person. An employer may not allow any employee to perform any duties or enter the employment premises if the employee is not wearing a face mask while performing his or her duties. Funerals Attendance of a funeral is limited to 100 persons or less and if the venue is too small to hold the prescribed number of persons observing a distance of at least one and a half metres from each other, then not more than 50% of the capacity of the venue may be used, subject to strict adherence to all health protocols and all persons maintaining a distance of one and a half metres from each other. Night vigils are not allowed, while after -funeral gatherings. including “after- tears” gatherings are also not allowed. During a funeral, a person must wear a face mask and adhere to all health protocols and social distancing measures. The duration of a funeral is restricted to a maximum of two hours. Borders The 20 land borders which are fully operational, will remain as such and the 33 land borders which were closed will remain closed. Daily commuters from neighbouring countries who attend or teach at a school in South Africa are allowed entry subject to compliance with protocols/ International air travel is restricted to the following airports: OR Tambo International Airport:
King Shaka International Airport;
Cape Town International Airport:
Lanseria International Airport; and
Kruger Mpumalanga International Airport Gatherings Every person, when attending a gathering and in order to limit exposure to Covid-19 must: Wear a face mask:
Adhere to all health protocols:
Maintain a distance of at least one and a half metres from each other:
Adhere to the curfew hours;
Adhere to any other health protocols and social distancing measures. An owner or operator of any indoor or outdoor facility where gatherings are held must display the certificate of occupancy which sets out the maximum number of persons the facility may hold. All faith-based, religious, social, political and cultural gatherings are permitted but limited to 100 persons or less for indoor venues and 250 persons or less for outdoor venues and if the venue is too small to hold. Gatherings at a workplace for work purposes are allowed, subject to strict adherence to all health protocols and social distancing measures. Hotels, lodges, bed and breakfasts, timeshare facilities, resorts and guest houses are allowed full capacity of the available rooms for accommodation, with patrons observing a distance of at least one and a half metres from each other when in common spaces. Conferencing, dining and entertainment facilities are subject to a limitation of a maximum of 100 persons or less for indoor venues and 250 persons subject to strict adherence to all health protocols and social distancing measures. Sporting activities, including both professional and non-professional matches are permitted but without spectators. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> Read: South Africa moves back to lockdown level 1 – here are the changes, and restrictions still in place