Clicks’ pharmacists can help you with advice on how to avoid unnecessary out-of-pocket medication costs, ensuring you never pay more for your medication than you have to in 2021. Click here to view all promotions Clicks has to offer. Here are a few pointers to get both your health and your finances back on track: A generic medicine is the same as existing brand name originator medicine in dosage form, safety, strength, quality, and performance characteristics. The benefit of these generic medicines is that they tend to be cheaper than the brand name alternatives. Your Clicks pharmacist can offer you an affordable generic alternative, potentially saving you up to 30% on your medication compared to an originator medicine or even another more expensive generic medicine. Your medical aid may also only pay for authorised chronic medication up to a certain level of cover, and higher-priced medicines will use up your cover much faster. Your Clicks pharmacist can assist by dispensing the generic medicines that your medical aid pays for in full, which ensures your benefits last longer. Note that this is applicable to medicine authorised by your medical aid, so it is best to check your medical aid benefits for more information. Filling your scripts at a pharmacy provider which is not on your medical aid’s preferred or designated provider list can lead to additional out-of-pocket medication costs or penalty co-payments. Clicks has partnered with most medical aids to ensure that you avoid these unnecessary co-payments and out of pocket expenses. Clicks offers great value through its low pricing and promotions on self-medication brands. At Clicks, we are committed to saving you over *R100 million across our top self-medication brands via promotions in 2021. Ensure you stay up to date with all Clicks promotions by visiting this webpage. ClubCard members can also earn points on the dispensing fee. Your Clicks pharmacist can help you save by ensuring your monthly medication is correctly claimed from the applicable benefit within your medical aid. Whether you are paying cash or via your medical aid, Your Clicks pharmacist can help you save on your medication costs in 2021. *The R100m saving is calculated as the difference between the standard cash self-medication marked up price and the promotional price charged on all planned promotional product sales over the year 2021. This article was published in partnership with Clicks Health.