The South African Revenue Service (SARS) will increasingly focus on tax mistakes as it has effectively lowered the threshold to criminally prosecute taxpayers. Prior to the latest tax amendment legislation becoming final, a taxpayer could only be liable for a fine or subject to imprisonment if the relevant transgression was committed “wilfully and without just cause”. SARS commissioner Edward Kieswetter said that the change will bring the revenue collector in line with other international tax authorities, and that South African tax legislation has previously embedded these principles. “This is not introducing something which is completely new, it is simply regularising which was an oversight in the 2011 Tax Administration Act formulation,” he said. “Many commentators, with some degree of sensationalism, are projecting a scenario where the state will have a free-for-all against taxpayers.” However, Kieswetter said that this is not the case, and that the state is still required to prove blameworthiness when pursuing taxpayers. He added that this needs to be proven beyond a reasonable doubt.  Mistakes Doelie Lessing, director at Werksmans Attorneys, said that the proposed amendments were met with fierce resistance and were severely criticised by tax practitioners and civil society on the basis that the removal of the element of wilfulness would result in the erosion of the protections against the criminalisation of unintentional mistakes by taxpayers. This is because the proposed amendments would have effectively removed SARS’ obligation to prove intention before a taxpayer could be found guilty of these non-compliance offences. Lessing said that the final amendment legislation has not done away with intent entirely, but rather a differentiated approach has been adopted in terms of which the existing list of non-compliance offences has been split into two categories: Offences that require wilfulness, where the heavier burden of proof falls on SARS;
Offences in respect of which “negligence” will suffice to trigger potential criminal liability. Lessing outlined the different categories of offences in more detail below. Read: This calculator show how much money you can claim back from SARS for working from home