The Discovery Health Medical Scheme has outlined Covid-19 vaccination plans, as it begins preparations for phase 2 of South Africa’s Covid-19 rollout. In a note sent to clients this week, Discovery said that vaccines will be administered in accredited vaccination sites across the country, including pharmacies, GP practices, hospitals, and dedicated vaccination sites. Discovery said it is setting up several dedicated vaccination sites for convenience, and that it plans to share the location details early in May. “The cost of your vaccination at an accredited vaccination site will be covered in full if you are a member of a medical scheme. If you are not a member of a medical scheme, the cost of your vaccination will be covered by the government,” it said. How to get a vaccine Discovery said that eligible users can register on the national Electronic Vaccination Data System (EVDS). Currently, this is limited to South Africans over the age of 60. Registration on the EVDS provides you with a vaccination code that you will present on the day of your scheduled vaccination. This process is managed by the National Department of Health. The group said it will also send clients a personalised invitation to register on the Discovery Covid-19 vaccination portal. Discovery said that this registration will offer a tailored journey including: Where you are in the queue to get vaccinated;
What to expect and how to prepare for your Covid-19 vaccination;
Notification of when you need to go for your second dose (if you receive a two-dose vaccine);
An internationally accredited Covid-19 vaccination certificate. Discovery said that it will prioritise and protect its elderly clients and high-risk clients first, with members split into four groups: Group A: Registration of all clients older than 80 years;
Group B: Registration of all clients older than 60 years but younger than 80 years;
Group C: Registration of all clients younger than 60 years with underlying medical conditions;
Group D: Registration of all clients younger than 60 years with no pre-existing conditions or comorbidities. “We will send out personalised invitations over the course of the next few weeks as per the below groups, starting with Group A,” it said. “Vaccinations are not on a first-come-first-served basis, so there is no rush, and we will aim to have the registration of all Discovery clients completed before phase 2 starts.” Read: South Africa set to lift Johnson & Johnson vaccine suspension