Jeremy Lichtenstein is Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE) solutions architect at Pinnacle, a leading ICT distribution company, and authorised distributor for HPE in South Africa. Lichtenstein is an experienced technical operations professional with a demonstrated history of working in the information technology and services industry. His skills lie in data centre management, pre-sales, virtualisation, HPE solutions and Microsoft products, having graduated from Torque-IT. Pinnacle offers its clients a broad range of leading technology products seamlessly delivered across an expansive footprint. In this episode of Business Talk with Michael Avery, Lichtenstein talks about the role of data and storage in the 4th Industrial Revolution. Data is now not only the responsibility of every business, but it is also a business-wide responsibility. To avoid being caught out by the rapid pace of change, businesses should start seeing data as the thing that can make everything better, he says. Although more hum drum than the exciting emerging industries, improvements in capturing and managing daily data has the potential to drive incremental change and inform strategy; one day at a time. This, in turn, leads to better customer contact, better ability to up-sell and cross-sell, better products and services and less guess work. All resulting from better use of data. Just as the first Industrial Revolution changed the nature of work forever by bringing people under the same roof, the 4th looks set to continue to accelerate the trend away from in-office working to further affirm the 21st century cliché of café-working – and beyond. Data-driven decision making and technology will fuel fully remote working and leaner, more efficient, organisations, according to Lichtenstein. He talks Avery through the importance of data and storage in driving the 4th industrial revolution, and highlights the key trends when looking at how business are protecting their data, given the move to remote working. Lichtenstein points to the biggest challenges business face regarding data protection and disaster recovery with more people working remotely, and pinpoints some of the solutions companies can consider to solve these challenges. The full interview is embedded below. You can find all the Business Talk with Michael Avery interviews here. <span style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" data-mce-type="bookmark" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span>