The South African Revenue Service (SARS) says it has received an overwhelming response to its call for job applications. In a statement on Thursday (15 April), the tax collector said that the vacancies will be filled to enhance its capacity to improve service to taxpayers and improve levels of compliance. The vacancies that were advertised spanned many areas of SARS operations including: Information Technology specialists;
Data Management specialists;
Audit and Risk specialists;
Investigations specialists;
Auditors with a specific focus on tax evasion and related matters. The drive was seeking to recruit 570 people – 370 at mid to senior level, and 200 entry level. “SARS is overwhelmed with the total number of 88,009 applications received. Of these 15,092 were internal applications. The state of unemployment in our country amply demonstrates the challenges that we face as a country. “It is a daunting challenge that all South Africans must act determinedly and diligently to overcome. SARS will play its role, and regrettably, absorb only 500 of these applicants as nation builders in our organisation.” Despite the overwhelming interest, SARS said that there are a few vacancies where not enough applicants applied. “Consequently, these vacancies are being re-advertised through our jobs portal on the SARS website,” it said.  SARS said that interested persons are encouraged to visit the Careers link on its website. Some of the jobs which are still open as of 15 April include: Data Analytics specialist;
Senior Manager: Programme Management (Building / Infrastructure)
Corporate Income Tax Research & Product Development specialist;
Technical Consulting lead specialist;
Tax auditor (level 1)
A senior specialist in Trusts. The tax collector also called on the private sector to give young graduates the opportunity to make a start in life by providing internships and, where possible, employing them. “On average, there were 468 applications (internal and external) per job category. “Of the total number of applications, there were 7,946 applications from external graduates, while there were 755 applications from chartered accountants out of the total number of applications,” SARS said. There was also a substantial pool of applicants at Masters and PhD level, it said. “As can be seen from the numbers, our country has a large pool of expertise in various fields from which prospective employers can draw from to help the country fight the challenges of poverty, unemployment and inequality. We must all rise to this challenge.” Read: Here’s where the rand and local markets are heading: Nedbank