Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Coronavirus: Global Covid-19 infections have hit 142 million confirmed, with the death toll reaching 3.03 million. In South Africa, there have been 1,089 new cases, taking the total reported to 1,566,769. Deaths have reached 53,736 (a daily increase of 25), while recoveries have climbed to 1,490,143, leaving the country with a balance of [] active cases. The total number of vaccines administered is 292,623. Restart: Health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize has been urged to restart the Johnson & Johnson Covid-19 vaccine rollout, with the local health regulator Sahpra saying that there are no significant risks with the vaccine. The rollout was halted after a one-in-a-million case of blood clotting emerged from the USA. However, no local cases of the same have been found, and medical experts recommend keeping an eye on high risk patients instead of stopping the entire vaccination process. [ENCA] Incompetent: South Africa’s municipalities are in sever financial distress, with the situation getting worse year over year – and a parliamentary response from acting minister in the presidency, Khumbudzo Ntshavheni shows why. According to Ntshavheni nearly half (47%) of all senior municipal officials, as well as those in charge of finances, do not meet competency levels. This is indicative of a lack of skills and competencies  to do their job. 160 municipalities are in financial distress, carrying R132 billion in debt. [News24] Intimidation: The state capture commission is shaking off alleged attempts at intimidation, following a burglary at one of its offices at the weekend. While the crime may have been petty criminality, the commission is treating it as a threat to its work, and is beefing up security. Nothing was stolen that would disrupt the commission’s work, it said. The commission reported that a bullet was also fired into the office in recent weeks. The commission has had several break-ins and professional burglaries during the course of its work. [Daily Maverick] Above the law: A group of civil leaders, legal experts and other prominent voices have thrown their support behind the ‘Defend our Democracy’ movement, which has emerged in opposition to the defiance shown by Jacob Zuma and his supporters towards the judiciary. Zuma has defied the Constitutional Court and dared it to send him to prison, after refusing to engage in any judicial process probing his involvement in corruption. Defend our Democracy and the leaders adding their support to it, say that no one is above the law, and are supporting the constitutional processes underway. [TimesLive] Markets: The US dollar remains under pressure, trading near a 5-week low, as an increase in risk appetite saw stocks and emerging market currencies gain momentum. Locally markets are keeping an eye on Eskom’s power generation capacity and the load shedding situation, as well as the Covid-19 infection rate, as we approach winter. There is little on the data front today, with the EU releasing current account balances and construction output. The rand remains on solid ground, opening the week at R14.29/$, R17.07/€ and R19.76/£. [Citadel Global]