A second home in a great location can serve as the perfect getaway, especially in one of the Southern African neighbouring countries given the easy access for SA property buyers, says the Seeff Property Group. Namibia – from R1.5 million for an apartment close to the beach in Henties Bay Namibia needs little introduction and is world-renowned for its beautiful landscapes and tourist attractions. One such is Henties Bay which is a popular holiday destination for South Africans. It is also a great place to buy a holiday property or to retire, said Maria Esterhuysen, licensee for Seeff Namibia. The Namibia currency is pegged to the SA rand which you can use in the country. All you need is your South Africa passport to get in and out and you can stay for up to 120 days. South Africans are free to buy residential property in the country. Henties Bay is 70kms north of Swakopmund and easily accessible via the new tarred road. It is famous for its beaches and fishing for species like Kabeljou, Steenbras and Galjoen or simply enjoying a drive in the Dorob National Park. It is ideal for outdoor adventurers including 4X4 enthusiasts and sunbathers. The town has basic amenities, eateries and more. Here, you can still find properties with amazing views of the ocean at a reasonable price. Basic properties start from around R1 million for an apartment and R1.5 million for a three-bedroomed house. Namibia – Henties Bay Golf Estate Retirement Village – priced from R1.595 million to R1.995 million for a new apartment, development comprises 30 units in four design options with a choice of one to three bedrooms along with security and walking distance to the beach. Activities in the area include golf, fishing, tennis, hiking trails, horseback riding. A medical centre and assisted living units are planned for the next phase. Priced at R1.395 million for one-bed, R1.595 million for two beds and R1.995 million for three beds. Eswatini – from R3,3 million for a house in the Nkonyeni Golf Estate Eswatini is an easy getaway, especially for those who live in Gauteng due to the proximity and you can use your SA rands. The Nkonyeni Golf Estate is about five hour’s drive from Johannesburg and is located some way down the MR9, about 25km from Manzini. Nkonyeni is set on a long, undulating and fairly open slope on the Usutu River. It boasts a championship golf course and amenities such as squash and tennis courts, a small spa, swimming pool at the clubhouse and one at the small recreation centre. Prices range from about R3.3 million for a newly built home in Phase 2 of Nkonyeni. There are a number of vacant plots from R500,000 to build your own dream home. There are also rental properties available in the estate, the property group said. Mauritius – from R6 million for an apartment in the Grand Baie area Mauritius is easily accessible from South Africa via air with regular weekly flights. It is an ideal second home location, or for permanent relocation or retirement. It offers spectacular weather and a clear blue ocean ideal for water sport. Second homeowners often spend many months on the island, said Seeff. SA passport holders get a visa on entry for up to 90-days but can now apply for a 180-day long-stay visa which means you could spend half the year on the island. Mauritius also offers a second residency route. There are a number of areas where you can buy property, said Severine Dalais-Pietersen, marketing executive for Seeff Mauritius. Grand Baie in the north is  one of the sought-after destinations with beautiful beaches and a lively village filled with boutiques, restaurants and bars. The island is easily explored from here and there are plenty of luxury hotels, golf courses and restaurants and attractions such as the markets, tourist hotspots and the waterfront in Port Louis. There are various developments ideal for second home buyers located across the island. Prices range from around R3.5 million for an apartment and luxury developments from around R6 million. The Nest in Grand Baie – priced from R6m, new luxury apartment complex in Pereybere, offering 12 apartments and 3 penthouses with stunning views and walking distance to the beach, proximity to the amenities of Grand Baie. Apartments range from around R6 million (MUR 16,500,000) and the penthouses from around R9.1 million (MUR 25,000,000) for the penthouses. Cap Marina in Cap Malheureux (famous for the red-roofed Chapel of Notre Dame Auxiliatrice) in the north close to Grand Baie is an innovative new multi-generation development. The 22ha residential resort offers stunning sea views and direct beach access, tropical landscaping, a freshwater canal for kayaking and a host of amenities including a small supermarket, pharmacy, 24/7 medical assistance, bakery, various shops, a swimming pool, gymnasium, concierge, kids’ club and spa. It is the first high-end residential development that offers eco-friendly building and energy-efficient installations and equipment. Various property options are available including apartments, townhouses (with plunge pool or jacuzzi) and villas with 2-4 bedrooms. Apartment prices range from R2.7 million (MUR 7,495,000), duplexes/townhouses from R4.5 million (MUR 12,450,000) and villas from R37.6 million (MUR 13,590,000). Ki Resort located on the north coast of Mauritius close to the beautiful beach of Péreybère, the estate is designed around an impressive swimming pool and offers 56 units comprising two and three-bedroomed apartments and penthouses with a rooftop terrace and private pool. The 5-star amenities include a gym, rooftop terrace, beach club, concierge service and more. Prices range from R6.2 million. Read: Wealthy South Africans are actively looking for ‘Plan B’ in these countries