The HP Colour LaserJet E47528f printer offers tremendous value to South African businesses. HP printers are designed to offer the best printing experience for businesses across almost every vertical. They offer elite features across the board – from fast, high-quality printed pages to market-leading security. Contact Nashua today to learn more. If you are looking for a printer that will set your teams up for success, look no further than HP’s range of LaserJet printers. The HP Colour LaserJet E47528f printer in particular offers tremendous value to South African businesses. The E47528f is HP’s smallest Enterprise Multi-Function Printer, making it a perfect fit for any office. Its small size makes it easy to fit into your office layout, while this also makes it great for remote employees, as it is easy for them to find space for the printer in their home. Alternatively, you can use the built-in HP Roam for Business functionality to print through the cloud – meaning your employees to print a document from their home office to your office-based printer. This printer offers all of the features that businesses have come to expect of HP’s market-leading MFP printers – including speedy duplex printing and high input capacity. A colour touchscreen display and impressive internal hardware mean that your printer is easy to operate and can perform all the tasks you need it to in less time. It offers incredible value in terms of its toner usage, too, which saves you lots of money which you can spend on other areas of your business. You also save money by getting it as a managed device from Nashua, as this reduces the total cost of ownership. This is because managed services optimise your print workflows, minimise downtime, execute preventative maintenance, and free up your IT department’s time for important business-related tasks. The E47528f uses a variety of innovative HP technologies to optimise your printing processes. This includes HP Smart Device Services – which helps service providers monitor the health of your device and fix any issues before they affect your business. HP Sure Start then checks your operating code automatically and repairs itself if it is compromised by a threat, while HP Connection Inspector monitors your network connections to protect against suspicious requests and malware. You can also choose the optional Jet Advantage Security Manager, which makes it easy to set your configuration policies and validate your security settings for every HP device in your fleet. Additionally, the printer has the HP Open Extensibility Platform that allows it to integrate with third-party solutions and card readers, while HP Roam for Business makes it easy for your mobile workforce to access your printers from anywhere. If you are interested in the HP Colour LaserJet Managed MFP E47528f, Nashua is the ideal Managed Print Solutions Provider for your needs. Nashua has 60 franchises across southern Africa and offers an extensive range of HP multi-function printers and support services which will cater to your every business need. Contact Nashua today to learn more.