Government has gazetted new rules for domestic workers in South Africa, which will see them covered under the Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act (Coida). The changes, which were officially introduced in March, confirm that domestic workers are now covered under the act for illness or injury contracted at work. It also provides further information on the types of compensation that will be paid and what compensation will be paid for. The compensation payable to domestic workers for occupational injuries and diseases are the same benefits that are payable to all other injured employees. The new regulations mean that all employers of domestic workers – whether part-time or full-time – must register themselves and their employees with the Compensation commissioner, says Jose Jorge, a director in Cliffe Dekker Hofmeyr’s Employment practice. Speaking in an interview with Cape Talk, Jorge said that this includes other employees in the home, including gardeners. Jorge said that domestic workers will need to be registered within seven days of signing an employment contract with a new employee. Where an employment contract already exists, a domestic worker should be registered by an employer as soon as possible. While no strict deadline has been set as yet, employers are being strongly encouraged to register as soon as possible.  He added that it seems likely that penalties for non-registration will kick in after the end of March 2022. The forms required for registration and submission are included in the gazette itself on pages 12 – 16.  Employers are expected to prepare the following documents: Completed CF-1E form;
A copy of your ID, passport or work permit;
Proof of your residential address;
A copy of your employee’s ID, passport or work permit;
A copy of the employment contract. They will then need to email all of the above documents to RegistrationCF@labour.gov.za or CFCallcentre@labour.gov.za, requesting to be registered as a domestic employer. Read: Here is the expected petrol price for May