Taropa Technologies, a level 1 B-BBEE contributor, is a dedicated business solutions aggregator in office automation – providing quality products, professional services, and value-added support to its dealer network in Southern Africa. Taropa Technologies offers a range of A3 and A4 Multifunction HP printers and genuine HP supplies, supported by a dedicated sales team, certified technical training, onsite and remote technical support, warranty support, national free delivery, as well as their flexible finance solutions. HP has a reputation of excellence within the Office Automation contractual print industry, making them the perfect choice for businesses who aim to improve productivity through secure and cost-effective printing. HP is one of the leading printing technology companies in the world and keeps reinventing itself and its technologies. Its original HP toner cartridges offer the best colours and the highest quality results from the first page to the last, the company also designs its toner cartridges to be easy to use, dependable, secure, cost-effective, and part of a closed-loop economy. HP multifunction printers offer the strongest security in the printing industry, too, making them ideal for businesses wanting to protect sensitive information and documents. Additionally, they offer secure mobile printing, enabled by NFC support and 128-bit encrypted wireless direct printing which doesn’t access the business’s network. Taropa Technologies is a value added distributor, offering HP Printers, consumables, spares and HP ColourLok paper, to its network of dealers across Southern Africa. Each dealer has a dedicated sales account manager and internal sales consultant to assist with product information, sales training, marketing support and normal run-of-the-mill business as well as bigger tender projects. From a service perspective, Taropa offers certified technical training and warranty support. Through an Service Level Agreement, dealers can make use of onsite and remote technical support. Taropa is always looking for ways to improve their offering and business processes in order to add more value to its dealer network. One of the ways they did this is by offering flexible finance solutions. Click here to learn more about Taropa Technologies’ products.