Deputy minister of Trade, Industry and Competition, Nomalungelo Gina, says that government’s Special Economic Zones (SEZ) programme has continued to prove successful, with a number of developments expected to create more than 5,000 jobs in the country. In a statement on Tuesday (13 April), the deputy minister said that the programme has managed to attract a significant number of investors. “This has seen the value of operational investments increasing from R17.7 billion by the end of the third quarter of the 2019-2020 financial year to R19.5 billion by the end of the third quarter of 2020-2021 financial year. “This is a positive increase of R1.8 billion. During the same period, the number of investments have increased from 129 to 143,” she said. Gina said that the purpose of the SEZ programme is to attract foreign and domestic investments,  increase the number and value of exported products, accelerate the development of industrial infrastructure, help accelerate the beneficiation of the country’s resource endowments, and create decent jobs. Some of the developments which will create new jobs include: Tshwane Automotive SEZ is completing the construction of 12 factories with a private investment value of R4.33 billion. The investments are expected to create more than 2,000 jobs; Dube Tradeport secured new investments worth approximately R600 million, the investments are expected to create 841 jobs; Coega has signed four new investors that are estimated to be valued approximately R49 million and are expected to create an estimated 101 new jobs; Saldanha Bay is completing the construction of two manufacturing facilities with an investment value of R380 million, they are expected to create approximately 90 direct jobs; Richards Bay is completing the construction of edible oil factory and  Titanium Dioxide factory with a combined private investment value of R5.8 billion. About 600 direct jobs are expected to create; East London Industrial Development Zone completed the construction of nine investor facilities and the expansion of three existing facilities.  These facilities will create an additional 1,534 manufacturing and services jobs and these will be operationalized within the next two years. Gina said that the number and value of operational investments are expected to increase by almost R10 billion during the current financial year due to investments that are currently under construction. Read: More South Africans plan to permanently work from home – this is what it means for your annual leave