Capitec says it will make up it easier for clients to sign up and get bank cards in the coming months, as it introduces new features to onboard customers. In an interview with BusinessTech, Capitec chief executive officer Gerrie Fourie said that the bank has just launched the ability to open an account and join Capitec through its mobile app. This can be done by simply taking a selfie and scanning your ID documentation, he said. Fourie said that Capitec uses Home Affairs data to confirm the personal information, with clients also required to fill out the necessary FICA information. Once this is completed, the user can create a virtual card and collect a physical bank card from one of Capitec’s branches at a later date, he said. Fourie said that Capitec was also working on a new system that will allow customers to have their cards delivered directly to them at home, instead of being required to go into a branch. This system is expected to roll out from May 2021 onwards, he said. Changes to branches Fourie also confirmed that the bank was currently phasing out cashiers with an automated system across all of its branches. This will form part of plans to upgrade 220 branches in 2021, with the remainder of the bank’s branches to be upgraded in 2022. He explained that just two years ago, Capitec’s branches were 90 – 95% ‘assisted’ meaning that customers received help in some way from an employee. Today, Fourie said that Capitec’s are 40% ‘self-help’, with much of the branch upgrades focusing on bringing self-help kiosks and functionality to the foreground. In explaining the decision to phase out cashiers, Fourie said that these employees will be shifted to more customer-facing roles so that they may assist clients more directly. He added that the job of a cashier requires no actual skills, with a person effectively being given money which they then drop into a machine to count. Instead, Fourie said it was important that these employees are able to do what ‘humans do best’ and actually apply themselves to jobs that require human input and thinking. Read: Capitec reports strong second-half recovery amid customer growth