DStv says it has seen a surge in the number of scams targeting its customers in recent weeks, with criminals using various tactics to either defraud customers of their cash or target their personal information. While some scams are difficult to identify, there are usually tell-tale signs that can help you spot a scam, the group said. This often includes receiving an email or SMS claiming that you’ve won a huge prize for a DStv competition you never entered and for which you must either pay a fee or verify yourself by sending your personal details. “MultiChoice will never request your personal details via email or SMS – please do not hand over your personal information to anyone claiming to be from DStv. “Also, do not make payments directly to an individual claiming they are from MultiChoice or DStv – use one of our direct platforms to make your payments to your DStv account.” Below the group outlined some of the most common scams which are targeting its customers: Phishing/Gift Card scam Customers receive an email informing them that they’ve won a cash gift card or huge sums of prize money from a MultiChoice competition or that they’re being rewarded huge sums of money for being loyal DStv customers. The email then asks the customer to provide their personal details in order to claim the prize. Final notice scam Some DStv customers have received an SMS claiming to be from DStv demanding payment for a DStv Explora account. It threatens action if payment is not made today and includes banking details. “This SMS is not from DStv. Please do not make payment in to any bank account or through any link supplied. “Remember, you can check your account at anytime using one of our self service platforms including our website, our DStv app, or WhatsApp (0600603788).” Social media posts recruiting for MultiChoice DStv said that there are dangerous scams disguised as recruitment ads for MultiChoice. “One of our suppliers who recruits on our behalf, Afrizan, does use Facebook and twitter to advertise roles. Every advert has a reference number which can be verified against opportunities posted to the Afrizan website. “Please note that neither MultiChoice nor its suppliers will ever offer to drive you to an interview. Please be vigilant. “If you’re interested in working for MultiChoice, you can look for opportunities and submit our CV on our careers page on the MultiChoice website.” DStv Premium upgrade scam Scammers are approaching our customers offering them DStv Premium upgrades. They offer DStv Premium for a fixed once off fee per year where the customer pays the fee directly to the scammer. “Please be aware that you can upgrade your DStv account online at any time, do not believe anyone claiming to upgrade your account on your behalf. “Always make your payments directly to MultiChoice through these payment methods,” DStv said. DStv installation scam Scammers posing as DStv accredited installers are offering customers unrealistic DStv services like free package upgrades or free DStv for life for a minimal once off fee. DStv offers 6 subscription packages that you can choose from. If someone offers you a discounted DStv subscription at a once-off payment, treat this with suspicion and check it with us. “To check if someone is a DStv accredited installer – ask them for their DStv ID card, which specifies their qualification as well as the accredited company they work for. You can also check on DStv.co.za under installers.” Read: Multichoice supports calls for a household ‘TV tax’ in South Africa