Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Coronavirus: Global Covid-19 infections have hit 138 million confirmed, with the death toll reaching 2.97 million. In South Africa, there have been 847 new cases, taking the total reported to 1,559,960. Deaths have reached 53 ,423 (a daily increase of 67), while recoveries have climbed to 1,485,315, leaving the country with a balance of 21,222 active cases. The total number of vaccines administered is 292,623. Suspended: The South African Medical Association says the suspension of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine rollout in South Africa is not a cause for panic, as it is just a precaution, and should hopefully not last long. Health minister Zweli Mkhize said he is hopeful it will last only a few days. The rollout was suspended after 6 women suffered from blood clotting issues after taking the vaccine – but this is bearing in mind that it’s out of over 6 million shots delivered. SAMA said that, even if proven to be a side effect, the risks are low. [ENCA] Strained: Eskom has warned that its system remains under severe strain, with load shedding remaining a risk for the rest of the week. The utility was forced to implement load shedding late on Tuesday after breakdowns at generating units and delays in getting other units back online. While load shedding was suspended at 05h00 on Wednesday, because the group’s energy grid is old and prone to breakdowns, the threat of rolling blackouts returning is always present. [EWN] Step aside: ANC secretary general Ace Magashule is reportedly working to mobilise a revolt against the party’s step-aside rule, with the help of supporters in various committees. The party’s NEC said those who are charged with corruption have 30 days – until the end of April – to step aside or face suspension. However, challenges to the decision are now being made at sub-committees. Magashule also appears to have taken it upon himself to broaden the scope of the resolution to also include those facing allegations of corruption, which was not part of the ANC’s wording. [BusinessLive – paywall] State capture: Former Eskom and Transet CFO Anoj Singh denied that his travel was paid by the Guptas, calling it a coincidence that he ended up on a flight with the family. He also alleged that testimony about trips he and his partner had taken being paid for by the family was fabricated. It is alleged that Singh had met with the Guptas and their associates several times on various trips, and helped facilitate the winning of contracts at state companies worth billions. Singh denies this ever happened. [Daily Maverick] Markets: The rand starts the day on the brink of its recent high as US inflation fears were put to rest on Tuesday with the news that, although inflation was marginally above expectations, base effect is at play meaning that runaway inflation is unlikely. It’s a quieter day on the data front with EU industrial production due this morning, followed by local retail sales. The rand is enjoying the benefit of a dollar trading at a three-week low, as we kick the day off at R14.49/$, R17.33/€ and R19.94/£. [Citadel Global]