Jobs website Glassdoor has published a list of questions that interviewees should ask when being interviewed for a new job. While some interviews may feel more like interrogations, Glassdoor said that this shouldn’t be the case, and that prospective hires should feel free to ask more about the company to ensure they are a good fit. Some of the top questions to ask include: What do the day-to-day responsibilities of the role look like? – Success and happiness in a job boils down to contentment with the nitty-gritty of the everyday. What are the company’s values? What characteristics do you look for in employees in order to represent those values? – Dig deep to get more information on company culture. You’ll get insight into what is most important for the company as a whole, and what it values in the individuals who work there. What’s your favourite part about working at the company? – It’s important to get a sense of your interviewer’s opinions about working there. If enthusiasm flows easily, that’s a great sign. If it doesn’t, that is worth noting too. What does success look like in this position, and how do you measure it? – It’s crucial to have a deep understanding of how a company measures success. What are the key performance indicators (KPIs) for the role? How, and how often, are they measured? Are there opportunities for professional development? If so, what do those look like? – When asking this question, you’re looking to key into whether there are opportunities for growth and whether the company has a Learning & Development program. Stagnation is a big red flag, so be alert. Who will I be working most closely with? – This question will help you get a better sense of the dynamics of who your collaborators will be. Jot down names, ask for titles. It’s important to evaluate how cross-functional the role is. What do you see as the most challenging aspect of this job? – Knowing the good is just as important as knowing the not-so-good. You want to understand the scale of the problems you’ll be dealing with. Is there anything about my background or resume that makes you question whether I am a good fit for this role? – This question displays that you’re highly invested in the job and committed to understanding your prospects as a candidate. Plus, it will also allow you an opportunity to respond to any potential concerns. Read: Getting a Christmas gift from your employer – what are the tax implications including a year-end bonus