The Private Security Industry Regulatory Authority (PSIRA) has published a draft policy document for public comment, aimed at further formalising qualifications for security guards in South Africa. Currently, security training and assessment is conducted by security training providers at PSIRA-accredited training provider sites. However, due to the changing environment within the security sector, and the move to a digitalized society, there is a need to create easier and more convenient ways of assessing prospective and current security officers in line with developing trends, the regulator said. “This policy seeks to ensure high-quality training, improve professionalisation of the industry through credible training and assessments processes, and to measure knowledge, skills and competencies of trained security officers.” Some of the key proposals of the policy include: Setting standards for the planning, management, coordination and conducting of internal and external assessments; Ensure and promote credibility in the assessments of security officers (SOs); Provide for systematic approach pertaining to conduct, administration and management of accreditation of security officers; Ensure that learner records kept by the training service provider reflect genuine learner progress during the learning phase; Ensure the authenticity of internal and external assessments for accreditation and certification of prospective and existing security officers; Inform the security training providers, security trainers and instructors, assessors, PSIRA Staff of principles and procedures for the internal and external assessments. In addition to new assessments for security officers, the policy requires a full training cycle, attendance to classes, and teachings around both theoretical knowledge and practical components. PSIRA said that it will also establish a digital platform to cater for online external assessments, registration of learners, and automated marking. Learners who do not attain the required pass mark of 50%, will be afforded two chances to retake the assessment and must apply for re-assessment with PSIRA. Only learners who attain marks between 45% – 49% will qualify to apply for re-assessment. Where candidates for RPL attain 45%-49%, the candidates will undergo gap training in order to qualify for re-assessment. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> Security guards in South Africa and what they earn Data published by PSIRA in November 2020 shows that there are now 2,495,899 registered security officers across the country, with just under a million in Gauteng alone. The country has a total of 10,298 registered security businesses. However, being a registered security officer does not equate to employment, and PSIRA’s data shows that far fewer security officers are actively employed – 548,642. A circular issued by the authority in 2019 serves to align the industry with changes made to the national minimum wage and provides a baseline for the minimum that security officers can be paid. The current minimum wage ranges from R4,160 – R5,558 a month depending on their role and the geographical area.  This works out to an annual salary of between R50,000 – R66,700. However, it should be noted that this is a minimum baseline salary, and that guards can earn substantially more depending on their employer. Private security officers are paid according to the roles and responsibilities they have. Guards are therefore graded between A and E based on the type of duty they perform. Pay is further separated into regional areas, with more densely populated regions typically paying higher amounts. The rate of pay differs across South Africa in the following brackets. Read: Thousands of restaurants face closure in South Africa – franchise body