Health food restaurant Kauai has launched a new subscription service which offers unlimited organic coffee for a month as well as a daily smoothie for either 15 or 30 days. The unlimited organic coffee subscription allows customers to redeem any short hot drink every two hours for 30 days, up to 240 coffees over the 30 days, for a subscription of R299. A subscription for one small daily smoothie for 15 days costs R199, while a 30-day smoothie package costs R375, all available on Kauai’s app. “Innovation is a central tenet of our business, so we are thrilled to be the first restaurant group to bring this subscription service to South Africa and one of only a handful offering this type of subscription programme worldwide,” said Dean Kowarski, chief executive of Kauai’s parent company Real Foods. “We also understand that South Africans are looking for value during these tough economic times, so have designed our subscriptions to offer exceptional value on our organic coffees and smoothies,” said Kowarski. How it works The subscriptions are purchased on the Kauai app, which can be downloaded from the Apple and Android app stores. Customers receive a subscription voucher in the app, which indicates how many coffees / smoothies have been redeemed, and how many remain. Orders can be placed at any of Kauai’s 150 stores, with customers simply scanning the app to redeem their drink. Customers can also order on the app for delivery or for contactless collection in store, to help maintain social distancing. The launch subscriptions are available until 28 February 2021 and further subscriptions are expected to be launched soon. Kowarski said that the subscription model makes business sense for the company. “Subscriptions create recurring revenue by offering customers another reason to visit Kauai and build loyalty by nurturing long-term relationships with customers. We anticipate new customer acquisition to be fuelled by subscriptions,” he said. Leading US fast-casual restaurant brands like Panera Bread have also launched highly successful subscriptions, with the chain reporting 850,000 customers signing on within the first few months. Read: South Africa’s extended alcohol ban will cost jobs, businesses warn