Momentum Health says it supports the South African government’s phased approach that will see frontline health workers and high-risk citizens having first access to the vaccine. To assist in the government’s efforts, the medical aid scheme said that employer groups will have the ability to offer their employees vaccine through its occupational health capabilities and provide the vaccine at the employer. Momentum said it has an extensive network of occupational health capabilities as well as health insurance solutions for employees uncovered by medical schemes. “We decided that we need to do even more to assist government’s extensive rollout plans,” said Damian McHugh, executive at Momentum Health Solutions. “By offering this, employers will be able to do this onsite and get their employees covered for free through the solution or assist government by not having to fund for the lives that are uncovered by medical schemes”. McHugh said that medical schemes and health insurers have an important role to play in ensuring that all members of society have equal opportunity in receiving the vaccine, particularly the most at-risk members of the South African population. “As such, it is critical that the private and public sectors continue to work together this year to protect our citizens as we fight the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic,” he said. While Momentum Health Solutions’ clients will have access to the benefit immediately, they will still need to adhere to the government vaccination rollout plan so that the most vulnerable of the South African population are prioritised. In a briefing on Wednesday evening (27 January), Health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize confirmed that one million dosages of the vaccine are scheduled to leave India on Sunday (31 January) and will arrive in the country on Monday (1 February). A further 500,000 vaccine doses are set to arrive in the country later in February. “Government is working closely with the South African Health Products Authority (SAHPRA) to ensure no delay in approving the vaccine for use,” he said. “The Oxford University-AstraZeneca vaccine has already been approved various regulators around the world and is being rolled out in other countries. Read: The data shows that it is time to lift lockdown restrictions in South Africa: business group