The Top Employers Institute has published its list of the global top employers to work for in 2021. The institute assesses the people practices of participating companies through the independently audited and fact-based HR survey, which covers six domains and 20 subtopics across the entire HR spectrum. With the impact of the global pandemic and the uncertainty created around work, 2020 proved to be a year where the practices of companies could influence the lives of millions of employees and their families, said David Plink, chief executive of the Top Employers Institute. “In addition to the adverse impacts on global health systems and economies, businesses faced the significant hurdle of supporting their people in adapting to new ways of work. “In our research, we were glad to see that Top Employers put their employees first from the outset of the global health crisis. They responded and adapted quickly to the ever-changing situation.” Despite the challenges, it was business as usual and Top Employers were held to the same high standards as with every previous year, Plink said. “We also saw great opportunities and positive changes, including increased focus on well-being, a greater need work-life balance, and a reduction in time spent commuting.” This year, 16 organisations were successfully certified as leaders in HR for their outstanding strategies and people practices in at least 20 countries each. The global list of winners is as follows. Boehringer Ingelheim 
British American Tobacco 
DHL Express 
DHL Global Forwarding, Freight 
Infosys 
JTI 
Novartis 
Orange 
PepsiCo 
Philip Morris International 
Saint-Gobain 
Sandoz 
Sanofi 
SAP 
Takeda 
Tata Consultancy Services South Africa A total of 96 companies were named as top employers in South Africa as part of the 2021 rankings. The ranking is based on employers that provide excellent employee conditions, nurture and develop talent throughout all levels of the organisation, and which strive to continuously optimise employment practices. The companies are evaluated across a number of key areas including: Talent strategy;
Workforce planning;
On-boarding;
Learning & development;
Performance management;
Leadership development;
Career & succession management;
Compensation & benefits;
Culture Below is the list of top South African companies in the finance, IT and technology fields. IT and Technology Financial Services Read: How South Africa’s ‘game changing’ transformation law will work