COVID-19 has had serious ramifications on the financial well-being of South Africans. It has shown how important it is to have investments that provide a diversified source of income. Click here to learn more about investing with Opportunity Private Capital. Opportunity Private Capital is a boutique investment company who provide for private investors to participate in the financing of residential property developments. They offer you the ability to invest in the real estate sector and earn high fixed returns without the hassles associated with owning physical assets. The company has established a secure asset-backed investment structure to ensure that investors get great value while having all the necessary protection against downsides. Opportunity Private Capital investors have averaged around 18% per annum over the past five years. This trend continued even during the lockdown and the economic downturn that it caused in South Africa, and the majority of these investors have therefore elected to continue investing with Opportunity Private Capital in its next investment cycle. “We believe that if our structure can withstand this extraordinary period, then it speaks volumes for the secure financial and legal setup we have in place,” said Opportunity Private Capital. The next investment cycle is now open to new and current investors, with several new projects rolling out over the next three years. All upcoming investable developments are located in the Northern Suburbs of Cape which are thriving, popular, and safe residential areas, making it a great place for property development. Opportunity Private Capital has projected fixed returns which begin at 15% per year – making this a compelling investment opportunity. To invest with Opportunity Private Capital is easy, and you can follow the steps listed below: It is worth noting that over 80% of clients choose to reinvest their money – a firm indicator of how satisfied investors are. Further proof of happy investors can be found in their testimonials. “From continual updates as to where things are, as well as courtesy phone calls ‘just touching sides’ to then being given exactly what was promised – wow.” – Tracy. “It is such a pleasure to work with a dedicated team of seasoned professionals.” – Charles. “I couldn’t have made a better investment choice by investing with Opportunity Private Capital.” – Hopolang. Click here to learn more about investing with Opportunity Private Capital. DISCLAIMER This is a private placement and not a public offering. Different types of investments involve varying degrees of risk, and there can be no assurance that any specific investment will either be suitable or profitable for a client’s or prospective client’s investment portfolio. No client or prospective client should assume that any information presented and/or made available by Opportunity Private Capital or its Associates is a substitute for personalized individual advice from an advisor or any other investment professional. No guarantees as to the success of the Investment or the projected return are offered. They have undertaken to present as much factual information as is available and taken every precaution to offer sufficient security for the Investment monies given by Investors. Opportunity Private Capital is a juristic representative of Rockfin Wealth Management (Pty)Ltd FSP13370. Note that this investment product presented by Opportunity Private Capital is not a financial product that falls within the scope of any category or subcategory regulated by the FSCA. The information contained in this document does not constitute a financial service as defined in the Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Act nor is it intended to solicit investment or promote a financial product in any way. Opportunity Private Capital do not provide investment, tax, legal or accounting advice. This material has been prepared for informational purposes only. You should consult your own investment, tax, legal and accounting advisors before engaging in any transaction. This article was published in partnership with Opportunity Private Capital.