MultiChoice South Africa has announced that 236 students will benefit from bursaries worth R26 million as part of its 2021 bursary programme. The media group said that these bursaries will pay for tertiary education for students in a number of fields including science, technology, engineering, maths, broadcasting and media “We believe investing in these fields of study is critical for the future of our industry and our country,” said MultiChoice South Africa’s chief executive Nyiko Shiburi. “We are excited to provide access to the necessary resources for these future leaders, innovators, and entrepreneurs to thrive and flourish in fulfilling their highest potential.” MulltiChoice said that the bursaries will go beyond tuition fees to cover registration fees, accommodation, and a living allowance for the year. Applicants must be South African, and registered at a recognised South African institution of higher learning for an undergraduate or post-graduate degree up to the Masters’ level. They must also meet the academic performance requirements of a 65% or higher aggregate mark in their previous year of study. MultiChoice said students should apply if they meet the following criteria: You must be registered at a South African higher learning institute;
Bursaries offered to students of all years of study (inclusive of 1st postgraduate degrees);
You are studying towards any degree/qualification aligned to MultiChoice focus areas;
12-month bursary coverage for the 2021 academic year;
Designated South African citizen;
Eligibility and qualifying requirements must be met and no late applications will be considered;
Complete application form and all supports documents sent to: talentmanagement@multichoice.co.za by 31 January 2021. The degrees or qualifications that MutliChoice will sponsor include: Engineering (Computer, Electrical& Digital);
Computer or Data Science;
Applied/Computational mathematics;
Information Systems or Technology;
Customer Insights technologies;
Media, Film or Television Studies;
Scriptwriting;
Sport Broadcasting;
UX or UI or CX Design;
Creative or Corporate Brand Communication;
Digital Marketing;
Economics or Law;
Human Resources;
Finance (Internal Audit / Financial Accounting). The bursaries will be awarded for the 2021 academic year only. They may be renewed, based on the availability of funds and the student’s academic performance. Applications close on  31 January 2021.  You can find out more about the programme here. Read: Netflix subscriptions blow past 200 million