Mobile operator Cell C says it is making progress with the implementation of its network strategy as part of its turnaround strategy, aimed at improving operational efficiency. The migration process, it said, has started with contract and broadband customers and is due to be completed in the next two months. The phased transition of prepaid customers will be confirmed in due course, Cell C said. The group said that its network strategy will enable the company to provide network services to customers via roaming agreements with partner networks while continuing to offer a full Cell C customer experience. “Network roaming agreements are being implemented over three years during which time Cell C will transition customers from its own network onto partner networks, and decommission its own towers in the phased process,” it said in a statement on Wednesday (13 January). “Our strategic vision is to differentiate ourselves by focusing on innovative products and services without being owners of capital-intensive infrastructure. This creates more flexibility and capacity to deliver the right quality of service to our current and future customers,” said Cell C CEO, Douglas Craigie Stevenson. “Cell C is pioneering the evolution of the MNO space in South Africa by becoming a significant wholesale buyer of network capacity and infrastructure services. It is a win-win as the individual operators deliver segmental expertise to the benefit of everyone in the industry.” By adopting a network roaming model, Cell C said it hopes to promote more resourceful use of the telecommunications infrastructure capacity in the country, improve the overall network connectivity and provide customers with a better customer experience. “We are moving closer to our vision that offers customers quality network access and makes Cell C a customer-first service provider, enhancing lives and providing digital solutions on a scalable quality telco platform. “Operationally the business is getting stronger, and a successful recapitalisation will secure the long-term sustainability of Cell C,” said Craigie Stevenson. What customers need to know To minimise any impact on service Cell C has called on contract and broadband customers to activate “Data Roaming” manually on their phone’s settings. If you have a router you will need to do this via a PC. For Apple device users, their data roaming will be activated automatically. Cell C said it will send customers 3x SMS prior to the cutover taking place. “It’s important not to ignore these,” the group said. Cell C said it has prepared a handy step-by-step guide on its website. Read: Cell C reports R7.5 billion loss