Low-code is an approach to software development where applications are developed and delivered with the help of code generation and automation. Organisations have felt the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, and it has forced them to adapt and to transform more rapidly than what was expected, said Botha van der Vyver, Managing Director at JustSolve. “These organisations have not just been looking for ways to counteract the threats caused by the pandemic and the economic crisis that the national lockdown created, but to also leapfrog them forward and to disrupt their industries.” This extends to IT organisations, who are increasingly in the market for tools and solutions which can help them deal with these threats and to rapidly implement their digital transformation strategies. Low-code is one such solution, as it deals with all of the major pain points that these organisations are experiencing, such as Speed of delivery, Effortless Integration, Great User Experience, Easy Extension of Apps, Enhanced Scalability and Built-in Security. Click here to contact JustSolve and learn more about low-code platforms. Low-code is an approach to software development where applications are developed and delivered with much less hand-coding than usual. The OutSystems platform dramatically accelerates the development process for enterprise-class applications while also delivering unprecedented levels of flexibility. With OutSystems, customers not only speed through their backlogs, but they are also able to swiftly adapt applications in lockstep with the evolving needs of their businesses and keep pace with emerging trends in technology. Low-code development platforms offer a number of tools which enable your software developers to use modelling and a graphical interface to build applications without worrying about all of the underlying infrastructure and re-implementation of common patterns. It is important to note that there are vast differences between the different low-code platforms and tools available – some of which are significantly more comprehensive than others. To help you make sense of it all, here is an evaluation guide to assist. It is also worth noting that low-code differs from no-code, in that while low-code enables developers to use a visual development method, they still have full control of the underlying code should they need to make changes or extend it. Low-code is increasing in popularity across the globe, as evidenced by the OutSystems State of Application Development survey. In 2018, 34% of respondents were using low-code platforms and 9% were about to begin using them; this increased substantially to 41% and 10% respectively in the 2019 edition of the survey. Gartner has predicted that this method of software development will be responsible for over 65% of application development activity by 2024. The low-code market, based on recent data, is predicted to reach the value of $187 billion by 2030 (up from $10.3 billion in 2019). The reason for this growth lies in the increasing pressure on IT to deliver value to the business, accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic and lockdowns and the limitations of traditional development that hinder developer productivity and increase backlogs. With its visual approach to coding, low-code development can empower your existing development teams to build high-quality multi-experience applications faster (also see the benefits of low-code). The survey also found that low-code projects span an extensive list of use-cases, including web-based applications, mobile apps, the replacement of legacy systems, rapid prototyping, and extending existing systems. The survey also found that the most common reason organisations were not using low-code was that they lacked knowledge about these platforms. Click here to download the full report. If you are an organisation that is not using low-code due to a lack of knowledge about these platforms, JustSolve would love to help you learn more about the OutSystems platform. Gartner has named OutSystems as a leader in the 2019 Magic Quadrant for Enterprise Low-Code Application Platforms, which is the top endorsement Gartner gives within its report. JustSolve has been an OutSystems partner since 2016 and is classified as an OutSystems Centre of Excellence. Learn more about how JustSolve transitioned into a fully remote workforce. Having won the Hero of the Year award for 2020 from OutSystems, for having the highest customer satisfaction rating of all the partners in the EMEA region, JustSolve is perfectly positioned to assist you in rapidly executing on your organisation’s digital transformation strategy. Click here to view our Outsystems Partner profile today. This article was published in partnership with JustSolve.