Microsoft Azure is the ultimate cloud computing solution, providing everything your business could possibly need to thrive. If you are looking to grow and modernise your business, it is important that you use the right tools and infrastructure. This will ensure that you have everything required to support your business today – and the ability to scale as you grow. Microsoft Azure is changing the small-to-medium business landscape by offering all of the above and much, much more. In fact, Azure is the ultimate cloud computing solution, providing everything your SME could possibly need to position itself for the future. Microsoft Azure is the best option for your cloud and application platform needs, as evidenced by Gartner’s market-defining Magic Quadrant report. Microsoft is the only vendor that has been awarded Leader status across Gartner’s Magic Quadrants for Cloud Infrastructure as a Service, Application Platform as a Service, and Cloud Storage Services for two consecutive years. This is largely thanks to the success of Azure. Azure has almost unlimited options for scalability thanks to the incredible range of products and solutions that Microsoft offers through the platform. And why should you care? Well, this means that as your business grows, and you need new products or solutions, Azure will have the answer. This also works in reverse – if you no longer need certain solutions, you can immediately remove them from your stack and will no longer be billed for them. This is particularly important given the current state of the economy, as you don’t want to keep paying for solutions that you no longer need. Additionally, your business will be empowered to try new products and solutions knowing that you will not be locked into lengthy contracts. Azure supports the broadest selection of operating systems, programming languages, frameworks, tools, databases, and devices – making it the most sensible option on the market. It also integrates with your existing IT environment seamlessly and securely so there is no need for a full IT rehaul or refresh you can’t afford. This is also done in alignment with data privacy laws using the world’s largest network of secure private connections, hybrid database and storage solutions, and data residency and encryption features. This ensures that you do not need to choose between Azure’s cloud infrastructure and your data centre, and you can rest assured that your data is protected. If you are interested in joining the Microsoft Azure ecosystem, Axiz Cloud Technologies can make the transition a smooth one. As a certified Microsoft Azure partner in South Africa, Axiz Cloud Technologies is highly experienced and has already helped many businesses find the Microsoft Azure solution that is best suited to their business. To find out more from Axiz Cloud Technologies about Microsoft Azure, please complete the form below. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> This article was published in partnership with Axiz.