The Independent Examination Board (IEB) has published its matric results for the class of 2020, with the group achieving a pass rate of 98.07%. The board noted that the 2020 NSC pass rate is 98.07%, slightly lower than last year’s pass rate of 98.82%. The board said that all candidates who passed, achieved a pass that is good enough to enter tertiary study at one of the three levels: 88.42% (compared to 89.51% in 2019) of the cohort achieved entry to degree study;
8.14% (compared to 7.91% in 2019) qualified for entry to diploma study;
1.51% (compared to 1.4% in 2019) achieved entry for study at the Higher Certificate level. 12,024 full-time and 1,139 part-time candidates from 233 examination centres writing in 261 venues across Southern Africa wrote the Independent Examinations Board (IEB) National Senior Certificate (NSC) examinations in October and November 2020. This is an increase from 2019 when there were 11,818 full-time candidates and 779 part-time candidates. While not immediately clear in the numbers, the impact of Covid-19 on the schooling population saw several learners withdraw from the year and postpone completion of Grade 12 until 2021, the IEB said. “It is interesting to note that the hard lockdown had differing impacts across schools within the IEB,” said Anne Oberholzer, chief executive of the Independent Examinations Board. “Some schools were able to make a smooth transition to online teaching and learning as they had the resources available and in fact, had already been using them in the normal course of events. “Their teachers were experienced in this mode of delivery, as were their learners who had access to devices and stable internet connectivity.” Oberholzer said that many schools could not deploy an online teaching model, either because the school or the majority of learners did not have adequate resources. To fulfil their commitment to teach their learners and not be defeated by the pandemic, teachers in these situations reverted to traditional distance education strategies, she said. “In some cases, they prepared weekly learning programmes for learners using textbook references and notes together with prepared exercises and tasks. These were emailed to learners where possible, physically delivered to or collected by learners and family members from the school. The completed tasks were returned to the school for marking and possible further teaching intervention if required. “The initiative of schools and teachers to continue with teaching and learning during this time is a testimony to their professionalism and the commitment of teachers and learners, as well as the support of parents to pivot and adapt to our changed circumstances,” said Oberholzer. Increase in home schooling Some schools also saw a number of learners leaving to join distance and online education providers, and there was also an increase in the number of children being home-schooled. “However, it soon became apparent for many parents that the concept of home schooling and the complexity and responsibility that goes into ensuring that their child is learning at an appropriate standard and pace is enormous, notwithstanding the massive adjustment for learners, many of whom struggled with this model and the social isolation, said Oberholzer. “Suffice it to say that the educational consequences of the pandemic have brought home a new societal respect for teachers and the role they play in the development and progress of learners.” As the examination period grew closer, a number of learners opted to only write a few subjects in the 2020 year, postponing the examinations in the other subjects to 2021. The excellent performance of the Class of 2020 under very difficult circumstances, underscores the importance of the years of good, solid teaching and learning prior to the Grade 12 year. “These achievements are proof that the Grade 12 year on its own does not provide the understanding, perseverance and resilience needed to achieve excellent results in the matric year – but that is the culmination of work and learning over 12 or 13 years of quality schooling,” she said. Read: New timetables and subject ‘trimming’ for schools in South Africa