The Covid-19 lockdown has seen a huge shift for people to both work from home (WFH) and study from home (SFH). The pressure placed on home-based network setups has increased exponentially and in many instances has caused a debilitating and counter-productive trend of decreased and weakened cellular connection uptime. Click here for more information about Duxbury Networking. “It’s all very well having Internet in the home environment, but if your signal is poor, or the demands on the system are too great, mobile phone connectivity will continue to be a problem. Nextivity has a number of Cel-Fi products that address this issue and provide a welcome boost of the existing network signal, thereby ensuring complete and superior connectivity coverage for each user in the household. Cel-Fi products are network safe, and provide no interference,” says Pete Nel, business development executive at Duxbury Networking, Southern African distributors of Nextivity’s Cel-Fi solutions. The Cel-Fi PRIME signal booster improves 3G and 4G LTE cellular service, and eliminates dead zones and dropped calls. “With 80 dB of gain, Cel-Fi PRIME will not only improve cellular coverage, it will also reduce your mobile phone’s power requirements and extend its battery life. PRIME offers plug-and-play cellular coverage for a room, apartment or similar space, enabling clear and reliable data and voice connections within the coverage area of approximately 100 m2. In an open space, the coverage bubble can be much larger,” says Nel. CE-certified Cel-Fi PRIME uses Nextivity’s patent-pending electrically steerable antenna technology and addresses pilot pollution issues wherever Bands 1 (2100 MHz) and Band 3 (1800 MHz) are used. Similarly, the plug and play Cel-Fi PRO Smart Signal Booster allows users to isolate and boost the carrier signal, thereby providing a cost-effective solution that allows for clear trouble free phone calls. Cel-Fi PRO covers up to 1 200 m2 of indoor space per system. The system features an LCD colour interface, is fully self-contained and self-configuring to the chosen operator network and requires no external antennas or wiring. Users simply need to plug it in to boost indoor cellular coverage. Cel-Fi PRO EXA variants feature an external antenna connector. “An external donor antenna can therefore acquire an outside signal, allowing it to be used in applications where no indoor signal is present (for example, cement and metal walls). This enables cellular coverage in hard to reach places by allowing the Network Unit to be placed where no service exist,” says Nel. Keeping up with school work remotely, when internet broadband coverage is not available can be frustrating for children and tertiary education students who are learning from home. “It’s very easy to fall behind on the syllabus if your connectivity is patchy. Even worse is the devastating scenario where a student is in the middle of an online test or exam and the signal is dropped. Ensuring complete and uncompromised connectivity is critical in a study from home situation,” says Nel. The Cel-Fi GO X is a smart signal booster that allows for fast and easy installation and on-the-go data and voice coverage. “The solution is the only carrier-grade booster product available to the market, delivering up to 100 dB of gain while parked in Stationary Mode, which is 1 000 times greater than the illegal repeaters found in many markets. This product is perfect for cellular-challenged areas that need an external antenna, and the installation complexity is similar to a digital doorbell or thermostat,” says Nel. He warns that boosting more than one network operator simultaneously is also against ICASA regulations and can result in prosecution. Cel-Fi GO X leverages the award-winning Intelliboost signal processing to deliver the industry’s largest coverage footprint with the best voice and data wireless performance. Cel-Fi GO X is NEMA 4 rated weather-resistant and does not interfere with other wireless devices. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za This article was published in partnership with Duxbury Networking.