It’s no longer business as usual. Samsung has released the epic Galaxy S21 5G, which has received universal praise for the most advanced processor ever on a Galaxy device, stunning edge-to-edge 120Hz displays, and a large battery for uninterrupted productivity and entertainment. Additionally, many people are especially excited about Galaxy S21’s pro-grade camera technology, the fact that it is 5G-enabled, and for the first time it includes the incredible S-Pen capabilities on the Galaxy S21 Ultra 5G. Click here to buy a Galaxy S21 5G smartphone. With many of us juggling the pressures of working from home and the office, Galaxy S21 5G is made for the way we live and work now. Every facet of a smartphone offering from design to performance has been considered. This includes a massive, a 5000mAh day battery, along with an intelligent power-efficient display and Exynos 2100 processor – ensuring that you can rise to meet the challenges of even the busiest of days. Losing power while on that important call is no longer a lingering worry. Even those never-ending Zoom Calls are enhanced on the large, immersive displays. Adding to the productivity levels, no matter where you are, the introduction of the S-Pen to the Galaxy S21 Ultra 5G is very welcome. It empowers you to draw, take notes, take and edit photos and present with seamless creativity. The Galaxy S21 Ultra 5G also includes its smartest and brightest display so you can work indoors and outdoors, effortlessly. Ultimately, you now have the power of a smartphone designed like a gaming PC. Galaxy S21 5G was created for those who want a light design and compact 6.2-inch display. Galaxy S21+ 5G sports an expanded 6.7-inch display and a larger battery, perfect for marathon gamers and the longest days. Galaxy S21 Ultra is the largest member of the Galaxy S21 series with a 6.8-inch Dynamic AMOLED 2X display. Galaxy fans who want to purchase the Galaxy S21 5G series can now make full use of Samsung’s popular trade-in programme. You can get up to R10 000* back from your older device. Samsung Care+, the popular accidental damage protection service plan exclusive to Galaxy smartphones offers even more value to your Galaxy S21 5G purchase. You can purchase your Galaxy S21 5G and get Samsung Care+ from as little as R499 once-off – which includes 2 screen repairs over 24 months**. * – Value of discount off will vary based on the quality of the pre-owned device submitted for trade-in.  Terms and conditions apply.
** – Terms and conditions apply. Samsung Care+ offer available until 31 March 2021. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> This article was published in partnership with Samsung.