A hybrid workforce means more remote meetings and the need for easy-to-use technology for your office team. In addition, social distancing requirements could mean revisiting conference room allocation and layouts. Click here to learn more about the Windows collaboration display from Sharp. The Windows collaboration display from Sharp (WCD) enables better space utilization and more productive collaboration so you can work smarter from anywhere. The windows collaboration display (WCD) from Sharp, a 70” size interactive display has built-in microphone array, high quality 4K camera and Internet of Things (IoT) sensor hub that works seamlessly with the best Microsoft 365 collaboration tools. Capacitive touch technology with direct bonding provides for superior touch accuracy and responsiveness on the WCD. The 4K camera has a field of view of 120 degrees and the built-in microphone array can capture sound from up to 6m distance. The screen is certified for Skype for Business and is supported by Microsoft Teams for the ultimate collaboration experience. Equipped with two USB Type C, the Windows collaboration display offers simple single connection from your connected device which covers all the video, touch, and network data needs, and even charges the same. Sharp also provides an 8m length – high speed, high bandwidth USB Type C cable with each Windows collaboration display. The Windows collaboration display has the ability for split screen with two active inputs being displayed. There are up to five possible connectivity options. The two split screens can be any combination of inputs, for example, 1 USB-C + wireless, or HDMI + wireless etc. Daisy chain for dual screen extensibility or duplication is possible. The Windows collaboration display has in-built Wireless Casting makes it easy to share information from any device, including Windows and Android OS. The advanced feature of Windows collaboration display from Sharp brings the power of the intelligent cloud into the workplace, using a combination of IoT, and productivity tools. With the built-in IoT sensors, employees can measure temperature, humidity, light and air quality of the meeting room to ensure a comfortable environment for everyone and that meetings become smarter and more productive. The advanced specifications, teamwork centric design and IoT connectivity option of the Windows Collaboration Display from Sharp make this screen integral to the workplace of the future.  Sharp PN-CD701 is now available in the Middle East and African region. For more information about Windows collaboration display, click here. This article was published in partnership with Sharp.