Curro Holdings, the JSE-listed independent education provider, has launched Curro Choice – an e-learning offering that broadens the range of subjects available to every Curro high school learner nationwide. Curro Choice offers a range of subjects, from languages (isiXhosa, isiZulu, Sepedi and French) to accounting, computer applications technology (CAT), AP maths, design studies, history and information studies. Curro Choice executive head, Marelet Moolman, said that the personalised learning programme is designed to give learners access to a wider range of subjects, and to help all Curro schools to expand their subject offerings. “Where some schools have 10 or 11 subjects for learners to select from, they can now offer more than 20,” Moolman said. “Learners at all Curro high schools have access to Curro Choice, which allows them to easily customise their learning experience to fit their interest and needs. They have more control of their own learning, without limits. Learning is then not just a one-size-fits all approach.” Alongside a personalised learning experience – namely, subject choices, and when and how a student is able to learn – additional benefits include being able to choose from a wider range of second language subjects, which is helpful for migrant learners or those who move provinces and wish to continue with their language of choice. The Curro Choice model is centred on blended learning, the group said. “Learners have access to excellent content developed by specialists through the e-learning platform, and on top of this, they are allocated a dedicated educator that guides and facilitates their success in the subject,” said Moolman. Where possible, Curro Choice subjects are offered during school hours. Alternatively, lessons are run in the afternoon after normal school classes, or learners can access the material at home. All lessons are recorded and are available online for learners to access anytime and anywhere. All that is required is an internet connection and data. Learners have the flexibility to revise material as required, it said. Curro learners can choose a Curro Choice subject in place of a school subject not on offer at their school (for example, if a learner would like to study French and the school does not have a French teacher), or they can take on a Curro Choice subject as an additional subject. Read: Curro reveals online school numbers