Low-cost South African airline Kulula says it will resume domestic operations at Lanseria International Airport from 1 April 2021. The group will service its Durban and Cape Town routes with a limited schedule, adding additional frequencies over the next couple of months. Customers are now able to book flights from Lanseria via various distribution channels at market related fares, it said. The opening of Lanseria routes follows other national flights at major airports resuming in December. This came after a months-long delay caused by the coronavirus lockdown and a business rescue process which impacted Kulula’s parent group Comair. The plans are part of a seven-month ramp-up period lasting until June 2021. International travel While South Africa’s domestic flights are now up and running, international travel remains restricted. Earlier this month, the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) gazetted new travel rules, which included updated guidelines around international travel. International travel is restricted to the following airports: OR Tambo International Airport:
King Shaka International Airport;
Cape Town International Airport. Long -haul flight departures and landings at the airports listed in paragraph are permitted during the hours of curfew. All international travellers arriving at the airports listed must provide a valid certificate of a negative Covid-19 test, recognised by the World Health Organisation. Even though international travel is permitted, several countries and airlines are still blocking travel to and from the country over fears of the Covid-19 variant first discovered here. Emirates and the UAE have imposed some form of travel restrictions on South Africa – with a flight suspension that will remain in effect until 10 March. Virgin Atlantic also extended its ban on flights to and from South Africa and may not resume flights until April. British Airways announced the suspension of all South Africa flights until 16 April. The US and a number of countries in Europe have placed a ban on travel to and from South Africa, with limited exceptions for some workers and returning citizens. KLM Royal Dutch airlines imposed a ban on travellers from South Africa since 23 January – but normal flights will resume from Tuesday (23 February). KLM noted that there has been no change to the requirements for entry into the Netherlands: a negative PCR test taken 72 hours prior to arrival/transit in the Netherlands, and an antigen test taken no less than four hours before boarding. Read: Kulula resumes flights in South Africa