The Department of Basic Education says the supplementary matric examinations in February/March has been phased out, with a new exam system set to be introduced. Ahead of the release of the matric results on Monday (22 February), the department said that a new examination is available during May/June where candidates can improve their results or complete outstanding results. The closing date for application is 31 March in the current year, it said. The conditions for entry to this new examination are as follows: Candidates can only register for subjects which they were registered for in the previous November examination. Candidates who opt for the multiple examinations opportunity (MEO) option, need to complete the outstanding subjects in the NSC June examination. Candidates who were absent with a valid reason (medical unfit, death in the immediate family or other special reasons*) from one or more external question papers, may register for the NSC June examination. Candidates who want to improve their overall achievement status, or only want to improve the achievement of a subject, may register for the NSC June examination. This includes the MEO candidates. In the case where a candidate was absent for one or more papers in the November exam with a valid reason, the candidate has the choice whether to write only the outstanding papers or all the papers. In a case where an irregularity is being investigated, provisional enrolment for NSC June examination may be granted to the candidate concerned, pending the outcome of the investigation. Candidates who were unable to write or complete one or more of the NSC November examination question papers for reasons other than illness/injury or death in the family, may apply to write the NSC June examination, provided that a written report is submitted by the principal of the school to the Head of the assessment body. The department said that candidates who do not qualify to write the June NSC examination, have the following options: Re-enrol for the NSC as a full-time repeater candidate at a school without delay, provided that the candidate is younger than 21 years of age; Register as a part-time repeater candidate at a Public Adult Education Centre; Register for the Senior Certificate (SC) examination which is a school leaving qualification for adults and out-of school learners, provided the validity of the candidate’s SBA has expired; Alternatively, candidates that were not successful in their examinations could consider vocational education and training. There are 50 Public Further Education and Training (FET) colleges across all provinces of South Africa comprising over 300 campuses or teaching sites. Re-marking exams The department said result queries should be submitted for investigation within 30 days after the release of results. “Candidates must ensure that names and identity numbers reflect correctly on their statement of results and report any required corrections to the department before 30 June 2021. “A candidate may apply at the prescribed fee for the re-mark/re-check of his/her examination scripts. Registration can be done at either the school or district office in the province (all instructions appear on the reverse side of the Statement of Results),”  the department said. Closing date for applications for manual and online applications is 10 March 2021. The fees for re-marking is R120 per subject and its R290 for re-checking a subject. “Viewing of scripts may only be done after a re-mark or re-check of results. The closing date for applications is seven days after release of re-mark or re-check results. The fee for viewing is R234,”  the department said. Read: South Africa moves ahead with coding and robotics at schools