Agricultural union TLU SA will petition Finance minister Tito Mbwoweni to allow all South Africans to deduct any security expenses from tax. Even though companies can deduct these type of costs, the union noted that Section 23(b) of the Income Tax Act prohibits individual South Africans from doing the same. “Countless South Africans have been subjected to the gravest invasion of their freedom by becoming victims of violence,” said Henry Geldenhuys, the president of TLU SA. “The Constitution requires the state to protect us from such invasions. However, the state’s utter failure to do so is painfully apparent, just from looking at its own statistics.” Citing data from Stats SA, Geldenhuys said that housebreaking or burglary is the number one crime in South Africa. An estimated 1.2 million housebreaking incidents occurred in the 2019/20 statistical year alone, affecting 891,000 households in our country. Like those on farms, South Africans living in remote areas are particularly vulnerable, as they reside far from any form of assistance, he said. “Considering the grave danger South Africans face daily, it is utterly disgraceful that the state does not allow security expenditure incurred by a taxpayer in securing their residence to be deducted from their income tax,” said Geldenhuys. “Section 77 of the Constitution affords only the minister of finance – Mr Tito Mboweni – the power to instigate the abovementioned amendment.” The TLU SA has drawn up a list of the necessary expenses each household in South Africa should be able to deduct from tax. These include: Defensive walls;
Security cameras;
Burglar alarms;
Electric fences;
Razor wire;
Guard dogs;
24-hour monitoring and armed-response services;
Home insurance;
Other home security measures and equipment; and
Expenses pertaining to the upkeep of the items, as mentioned above. TLU SA said that the list will be amended as it receives feedback about additional safety expenditure. “We call on all peace-loving South Africans, regardless of race, gender, age, or creed, to join us in one voice, demanding the minister amend the Constitution so we can protect ourselves,” Geldenhuys said. Read: What you need to know about South Africa’s latest crime stats