The Restaurant Association of South Africa (RASA) says it has been alerted that president Cyril Ramaphosa will be addressing South Africa in the coming days on the country’s Covid-19 lockdown. However, the trade body cautioned against further lockdown extensions as the current restrictions continue to decimate the industry and will not be supported. In a statement on Friday (9 July), the association says that it has reached out to every ministerial cabinet in consultation for relief and reprieve. However, to date, it said that it has not received any positive feedback or hopes of compensation. “Government has a responsibility to hear and consult with us. Retail and transport have made no compromises nor have they had any imposed restrictions or remodelled their businesses. “The restaurant industry will no longer tolerate compromise when there is no regard to control the uncontrolled spaces or to lock down the illicit trade while we accumulate extended debts and lose our livelihoods. “Restaurants simply cannot survive without alcohol or sit-down patrons or diner time sales.” Not how businesses work One of the key concerns raised by restaurants in South Africa is a continued disregard by the government around business models and a lack of communications. “There is a disregard to understanding our business models, financial applications and the needs of our operating conditions and our requests for the government to support our industry are ignored,”  RASA said. “As we now move into our most difficult trading months in restaurants, we cannot carry additional debt when we are already prejudiced in the trading of our restaurants and losing out on any potential in our operations. The association said that it was logging restaurant closures daily, with nearly 1,000 establishments added to date. “We are demanding government talks to us.” “We assure the government that we are always respected business owners, taxpayers, employers and have always displayed respect and are committed to adhering to the regulations and most importantly keeping our customers and staff safe at all times, ensuring that all health and safety standards in our restaurants are executed at their highest level.” Change in regulations While restaurants are pushing for a full reopening, it has also asked for the allowance for ‘roadhouse’ regulations which will better allow the sector to operate. Under the current adjusted level 4 lockdown, restaurants are only allowed to sell food as takeaways or through pick-up collection. RASA said that the introduction of new regulations would allow for roadhouse-style deliveries, where customers are served in vehicles. The association has also asked for communal take-away areas, outside seating and eating in open public spaces to help accommodate this. “RASA has approached the department of tourism, compliance, SAPSa authorities as well as (trade) minister Ebrahim Patel and (Western Cape premier) Alan Winde for support of our roadhouse concept and has motivated innovation and a new way of keeping safe in accordance with the regulations and protocols whilst we support saving lives and livelihoods keeping and maintaining a level of employment and public wellbeing.” “In principle, the response was well received and we are awaiting the final approval from the high-level government. We need resolve and approval on this but there seems to be no sense of urgency.” Read: 1.4 million jobs still haven’t been recovered in South Africa – Nedbank