Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) minister Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma has published a government gazette that introduces new restrictions for South Africa’s adjusted level 4 lockdown. The gazette gives effect to president Cyril Ramaphosa’s lockdown extension announced on Sunday evening (11 July), with the adjusted level 4 lockdown now set to remain in place until 25 July, at which point it will be reviewed once again. While the regulations remain largely unchanged, some amendments have been made for gatherings, travel and businesses. Movement of persons All people are confined to their home from 21h00 – 04h00, except in the case of emergencies or if they are an essential worker. The closing time for all businesses permitted to remain open is 20h00. Leisure travel in and out of Gauteng province remains prohibited until 25 July. This applies except in the case of businesses, emergencies, attending a funeral, moving residences or one of the other permitted reasons. Travel Public transport facilities may continue to operate, subject to further regulations introduced by transport minister Fikile Mbalula. Bus and taxi services may not carry more than 70% capacity for long-distance travel (a trip of 200km or more) but may carry 100% capacity for shorter trips. All passengers are required to wear a mask. Schools Schools and other institutions of higher education will be closed for contact classes until 26 July 2021, however early childhood development centres may remain open. Basic education minister Angie Motshekga is expected to provide her own update on the changes. Places closed to the public All gatherings are prohibited except at funerals, the workplace or when buying goods or services. The following must close to the public: Flea markets
Fetes and bazaars
Casinos;
Taverns, shebeens and bars;
Museums;
Conference facilities and entertainment facilities;
Older persons residential facilities. Persons rendering security or maintenance at these facilities may continue to do so. Gatherings at gyms, fitness centres, and restaurants are now permitted but subject to a limitation of 50 people or less. People should be more than 1.5 metres away from one another, and if the floor space is too small to accommodate 50 people, then not more than 50% capacity may be used. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> Read: Ramaphosa extends level 4 lockdown for South Africa – here are the new restrictions