The Department of Health has backtracked on its decision to allow certain groups of people under 50 to apply for a Covid-19 vaccination. In a circular sent to hospitals, health professionals and published on its website, the department initially said that the following individuals and groups will be considered eligible for vaccination outside of the vaccine roll-out eligibility criteria: Ministers, deputy ministers, premiers and MECs, as well their direct staff. Individuals where vaccination is requested by the presidency, the minister of health or the director-general of health. South African diplomats and their families who are posted overseas  – during visits to South Africa. Individuals who have received one dose of Pfizer vaccine outside of South Africa more than 42 days ago will be eligible to receive a second dose of the vaccine. Individuals who need to travel outside of South Africa. However, deputy director-general Dr Nicholas Crisp, who signed off on the original circular, says that it has now been retracted and will no longer apply. “Following the circular on the vaccination of special groups and individuals against Covid-19 there have been numerous comments, queries and submissions that indicate that the Circular is unclear in its intentions. The circular is withdrawn in its entirety,” he said. While no additional information was provided, acting health minister Mmamoloko Kubayi said on social media that the circular should not have been published in the first place as it was not approved. “This was not authorised by inter-ministerial committee on vaccine (sic) which is the final decider on target populations. “I have consistently maintained that I will vaccinate when my age group population is opened, this the stance by many of my colleagues. The circular has been withdrawn,” she said.  The retraction is another gaffe in South Africa’s Covid-19 response which has been plagued by vaccine delays, poor communication and corruption. On Monday (5 July), South Africa reported 12,513 new cases of Covid-19, taking the total reported to 2,075,409. Deaths have reached 62,171, while recoveries have climbed to 1,827,821, leaving the country with a balance of 185,417 active cases.  The total number of vaccines administered is 3,459,660. Read: South Africa will now offer Covid-19 vaccines to some people under 50 – what you should know