The National School of Government is hosting its annual ‘winter school’ programme, with a number of senior members of the executive taking part. Like the inaugural economic governance spring school that was held in November 2020, the Winter School is arranged into five sub-themes, one for each of the five days of the programme. These include: Governance and Economic Growth;
Development and the Global and Regional Economy;
Fiscal and Monetary Policy Interventions;
Building State Institutions as Instruments of Growth;
Leading Inclusive Growth. Participating members of the executive will be required to engage with academic literature and case studies ‘on the significance of effective governance in promoting inclusive growth’. They will be challenged to ‘analyse and reflect on their own decisions’ in the portfolios they lead and the extent to which these can be characterised as ‘manifestation of effective governance’. “The programme will enable members of the executive across the spheres to reflect and broaden perspectives on the critical topics as we work towards building a capable, developmental, ethical state and economic recovery”, said Public Service and Administration minister Senzo Mchunu. “This programme is part of several learning engagements that the national school of governance is implementing in partnership with higher education institutions locally and internationally, targeting elected officials and public sector employees.” In compliance with lockdown alert level 4 regulations, the winter school programme is being held virtually. Among the 40 participants in attendance are the following leaders from the three spheres of government: Ms Patricia De Lille and Ms Noxolo Kiviet, respectively Minister and Deputy Minister for Public Works and Infrastructure.
Mr Ronald Lamola and Nkosi Phathekile Holomisa, respectively Minister and Deputy Minister for Justice and Correctional Services.
Mr Alvin Botes, Deputy Minister for International Relations and Cooperation.
Ms Sindisiwe Chikunga, Deputy Minister for Public Service and Administration
Ms Faith Mazibuko, Gauteng MEC for Community Safety.
Ms Thembisile Nkadimeng, Executive Mayor of Polokwane, and President of SALGA.
Ms Kenetswe Mosenogi, North West MEC for Economic Development, Environment, Conservation and Tourism.
Mr Mzimkhulu Thebolla, Executive Mayor of Msunduzi Municipality.
Mr Patrick Mabilo, Executive Mayor of Sol Plaatje Local Municipality together with Members of his Mayoral Committee. Read: Ratings agency highlights key challenges for South Africa