The South African Revenue Services (SARS) has announced that taxpayers will be able to file their tax returns from 1 July 2021. The revenue collector added that a significant number of individual taxpayers will be auto-assessed once again this year, and that this process will also start around the same period. SARS said that the other important dates that taxpayers should be aware of are: 1 July to 23 November 2021 – This is the period for taxpayers who file online. Taxpayers who cannot file online can do so at a SARS branch by appointment only.
1 July to 28 January 2022 – This is the period for Provisional taxpayers including Trusts may file via eFiling or SARS MobiApp. Starting July, SARS said it will be assessing a significant number of taxpayers automatically.  “If you accept the outcome you do not have to file a tax return at all,” it said. SARS said that it auto-assesses based on the data we receive from employers, financial institutions, medical schemes, retirement annuity fund administrators and other third-party data providers.” “If you have not yet received your IRP5/IT3(a)s and other tax certificates like medical certificate, retirement annuity fund certificate and other third-party data that are relevant in determining your tax obligations, you should immediately approach your employer or medical scheme or retirement annuity fund or other third-party data providers to make sure that they have complied with their submission requirements.” If you accept the results of your auto-assessment and if there is a refund due to you, the refund will be paid by SARS. If you owe SARS money, you can make a payment on eFiling, via EFT or the SARS MobiApp by the specified due date on your notice of assessment.  What to prepare before filing starts SARS said that now is a good time to get your tax matters ready to ensure a smooth filing experience. The tax collector said that taxpayers should prepare the following information ahead of time: Make sure that you have received your IRP5/IT3(a)s and other tax certificates like medical certificate, retirement annuity fund certificate and any other 3rd party data that are relevant in determining your tax obligations
Reset your eFiling username and password if you have forgotten them.
Update your personal information such as banking details, address and contact details online on eFiling or the SARS MobiApp. Read: Medical aid prices in 2021: Discovery vs Bonitas vs Momentum and others