Mineral Resources and Energy minister Gwede Mantashe says that his department is working on a number of interventions to address the current energy supply challenges facing South Africa. Responding in a written parliamentary Q&A, Mantashe said this includes procurement under the government’s Risk Mitigation IPP Procurement Programme – commonly known as ’emergency power’. Mantashe said that the seven key interventions which will help address the power crisis are as follows: The department has amended regulations to enable municipalities to build or procure power from Independent Power Producers (IPPs). The department has amended of Schedule 2 of the Electricity Regulation Act and therefore making exempting certain categories of generation for own use from the requirements to hold apply for a licence. The department is working with IPPs and Eskom to ensure that projects signed under bid-window of renewable energy are completed as soon as possible. 1,200 megawatts of the 2,200 megawatts has already been connected to the grid. The remaining capacity is expected to be connected to the grid by not later than December 2021, The department is procuring power from existing private generators through short-term contracts. Eskom is finalising the procurement of 128 megawatts and the Department is finalising an offer to purchase additional power from existing renewable energy IPPs. The department is proceeding with the procurement of 1,995 megawatts of power under the Risk Mitigation Independent Power Producer Procurement Programme (RMIPPPP). Preferred bidders have been given until the end of July to reach financial close. The Department is planning to conclude the signing of Power Purchase Agreements shortly after that. The department has issued a request for proposal to procure 2,600 megawatts from renewable energy. The department will be issuing additional requests for proposal for 9 213 megawatts from renewables, coal, gas, and battery storage. These will be done between now and March 2022. Eskom has warned of increased demand peaks, and a higher chance of ongoing load shedding during the evening peak period (17h00 to 22h00) throughout the winter. The power utility implemented stage 2 load-shedding on Sunday evening because of 10 unit breakdowns at seven power stations. The breakdowns included three generation units at Tutuka, one unit at Majuba, one unit at Kriel, and one unit at the Matla power station. There were also trips at a unit each at Medupi, Kusile, and the Duvha power stations. South Africa was hit by the worst year of load shedding on record in 2020. Data published by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in March shows that 2020 saw 859 hours of load shedding. The most intensive load shedding was seen before the Covid-19 lockdown, which accounted for 63% of all load shedding seen in 2020. Most of this was stage 2 load shedding, the research body said. Read: South Africa emergency power bid threatened by legal wrangling