Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Coronavirus: Global Covid-19 infections have hit 168.53 million confirmed, with the death toll reaching 3.5 million. In South Africa, there have been 3,084 new cases, taking the total reported to 1,640,932. Deaths have reached 55,976 (+102), while recoveries have climbed to 1,543,951, leaving the country with a balance of 41,005 active cases. The total number of vaccines administered is 700,904 (+49,276). Third wave: Indications are that South Africa is in a third wave of Covid1-9 infections, with the country’s positivity rate breaching 10% for the first time since November 2020. Experts at the CSIR illustrated the rise in infections, noting that the country was on an upward trajectory. Other experts said a positivity rate above 10% indicates that the third wave has started, nationally, following several provinces – like Gauteng, Free State and the Eastern Cape – hitting this point in the last week. They warn that large gatherings should be avoided, as there is now a heightened risk of getting infected. [TimesLive] Defenceless: Civil society groups and associations are pushing back hard against planned legislation that will see South Africa’s gun laws changed to make it more difficult for civilians to get their hands on weapons, legally. One of the biggest points of contention in the draft laws is the removal of a section allowing guns to be acquired for self defence. Critics are arguing that removing this will leave civilians completely defenceless against criminals who do not care to abide by such laws to begin with. This means the only people who will have easy access to guns in South Africa are the criminals. [702] Defiant: The ANC is now considering further action against suspended secretary general Ace Magashule and two other senior officials, for ‘unbecoming, divisive and defiant behaviour’ in recent months. The party’s top officials met this week to discuss the matter, but no action has yet been determined, after they reportedly received legal advice against making a move while Magashule was challenging the whole process leading to his suspension in court. Magashule was asked to step aside voluntarily on the basis of his corruption charges, but he refused. He was then suspended – but again remained defiant to the order, taking the ANC to court on the matter. [ENCA] Delinquent: Delinquent former SAA director Dudu Myeni has failed to appear before the state capture commission – leaving her open to criminal complaints. Myeni is trying to get a postponement on her presence at the commission, but deputy chief justice Zondo wants her to answer for not pitching and defying the summons. Myeni’s legal team says she was not aware of the dates because her previous legal team never forwarded her communication about it. The commission’s legal team said Myeni has ignored all communications and links to the documentation being covered, adding that it was a clear and intentional ‘snubbing’ of the process. [EWN] Markets: The rand hit its strongest point against the dollar in over two years on Tuesday, reaching R13.85 during trade. It was driven by dollar weakness, while still riding the rise in demand for commodities. It was also given a boost by the Reserve Bank’s hold on rates at its meeting last week, followed by sustained credit ratings from S&P Global and Fitch. Economists say the SARB’s more positive outlook for the country has also fuelled the rand’s gains. On Wednesday, the rand was trading stronger still, at R13.83/$, R16.95/€ and R19.59/£. [XE]