No. No, it’s not. Because to code means that could be spending your time building a finished product only to realise at the end that you’ve missed an integral part of what your app or website needed to do. Or worse, your test subjects aren’t responding to a feature and you have to start again. Click here to learn more about JustSolve. And to not code means that you’re just a cookie-cutter away from being same-same, with nothing that differentiates you from the competition, who is probably outgunning you on technical specs and know-how. The answer is therefore, quite obviously, to low-code. Low-Code has all of the capabilities of code and none of the same-sameness of no-code. It is literally 5 times faster than traditional coding, cutting out costs and time. With the added benefit of quickly getting to a workable model that can be tested and readjusted accordingly. In a nutshell, it’s a more visual approach to coding, making use of drag-and-drop components. You can read more about it here. Low-code is so good that Gartner predicts a 65% domination on all app developments by 2024. There are, at the moment, several platforms offering low-code, with OutSystems, Sybrin Nitro and Microsoft Power Platform leading the pack. As it so happens, South African low-code experts – JustSolve – has partnered with all three, because each has its own pro’s and cons when it comes to capability, integration and flexibility. OutSystems is currently in front and has won countless awards, highlighting its innovative structural approach. But don’t discount the other two. Power Platform from Microsoft has bigger adoption and integration capabilities with their variety of compatible tools, whilst Sybrin Nitro is the unrated wildcard with massive potential. Nitro is home grown in South Africa, so of course they have our support! JustSolve’s CEO, Botha van der Vyver, is in fact an OutSystems Champion, an honour reserved for only a handful of people that make a significant and meaningful contribution to the OutSystems and low-code community. Through years spent at the forefront of software development, Botha brings professional advice and know-how to OutSystems user groups, giving back to the low-code and software development community through mentorship and skills training. Botha is a big believer in efficiency, and leading a team of over 50, with offices in South Africa, the UK and Australia, he is in the business of solving problems, creating award-winning designs, apps and websites. Amongst others. Having worked on some of the largest brands in South Africa, JustSolve can take any project from conception through to completion in record time. Does that mean that JustSolve shuns traditional coding altogether? Of course not. Because sometimes old school is still the best school. All that it means is that the team at JustSolve won’t force a solution on you only because it’s the only coding that they do. They assess each project on its own merits, make a recommendation and then apply it to the best of their abilities. Always open to discuss new initiatives and whether low-code is a fit for your company, either way, you can reach Botha here.