Retailer Pick n Pay says its Smart Shopper loyalty customers can now earn points on their on-demand delivery orders with the Bottles by PnP app. “Getting something back for their loyalty is one of the things that our customers love most about shopping with us, and now they have more ways to earn points and save,” said John Bradshaw, retail executive: Omnichannel at Pick n Pay. To earn loyalty points when shopping on the Bottles by PnP app, customers will need to add their Smart Shopper card number at checkout. The app will automatically save the Smart Shopper card number for all future app purchases. Customers will also soon be able to enjoy the full Smart Shopper benefits via the app, which includes spending their points, Smart Price deals, and personalised discounts, he said. Pick n Pay’s Smart Shopper boasts 8.5 million active members Bottles reports 700% growth “Pick n Pay customers have fully embraced the convenience and seamless shopping experience offered by online shopping and we were quick to respond to that demand. Our acquisition of Bottles by PnP late last year and moving it from liquor-only orders to groceries has given shoppers even more choice than before,” said Bradshaw. Bradshaw said that many new customers – especially in the 45+ age group – experimented with online shopping for the first time and haven’t looked back. Another enhancement is the introduction of 100% recycled paper bags for all Bottles by PnP orders. The paper bags will be rolled out nationwide to over 100 stores from which Bottles picks directly, the retailer said. “Customers ordering from Bottles aren’t currently able to reuse their plastic bags from each shop as a customer would in-store. Pick n Pay has worked hard to create a durable, recyclable bag that is made from 100% recycled paper and will keep customer orders safe during delivery”. An added benefit for customers who don’t have access to recycling services at their homes, is the option to make use of Pick n Pay’s recycling bins which are available at the majority of its stores. Pick n Pay also has a number of stores with Reverse Vending Machines for recycling. Read: Pick n Pay is targeting these types of shoppers as part of its new growth strategy