The COVID-19 crisis emphasised the importance of having the right digital collaboration tools to help workers maintain contact with their colleagues while working off site. While tools for audio and video conferencing have existed for many years, they have often provided an inferior experience to face-to-face engagements. Click here to learn more about the modern Huawei tools that make remote meetings better. “Now”, says Donna Mostert, Huawei Line of Business Manager at Mustek, “leaders are coming to understand that remote working will play a more significant role in our working lives on an ongoing basis, while many have also come to appreciate the cost savings that have accompanied the slowdown in global business travel.” As a result, many are now investing in solutions that overcome the negative associations of older systems and instead create seamless experiences that maximize worker productivity. An obvious drawback of remote working is the reduction of face-to-face contact among team members. In-person meetings affords participants the ability to receive much more information than just what is exchanged verbally thanks to body language cues and other subtleties of human interaction. There is therefore a tendency for people to believe face-to-face meetings are much easier and more effective than digital alternatives. To meet the new reality of a greater dependence on digital interactions, teams need to invest in systems that provide experiences that are as close as possible to what people expect from face-to-face interactions. The technology must not inhibit the desired outcome. This means investing in new-generation technology that can enhance the collaboration experience – including high-definition or ultra-high-definition 4K video at high frame rates. This video quality can replicate human presence and ensures non-verbal information is also being communicated. The use of low latency connections and high-speed processors can also go a long way toward eliminating the lag often seen in presentations, particularly when sharing interactive content. Creating and attending sessions should also be as simple as possible, regardless of whether the interaction is a meeting, conference session, workshop, or something else. These ideas are brought together in the Huawei IdeaHub. The IdeaHub integrates a variety of capabilities including intelligent handwriting recognition, high-definition projection, video conferencing, and open office applications. This awesome solution sports a modern look that is designed around user needs to maximise visual interaction and uses 4K 30fps video coupled with Huawei’s proprietary Video Motion Enhancement. The viewing experience is further enhanced by features such as active speaker tracking, which centres on the person speaking to ensure clarity in communication. Audio quality has been designed to match, with a built-in microphone array that features an 8-meter sound pickup zone that can be extended through an external array. Acoustic baffle technology allows users to define the sound pickup scope to eliminate the impact of ambient noise, making the IdeaHub suitable for use in shared spaces. When using the IdeaHub to listen to other people in your call, features available include active echo cancellation, automated noise suppression, automatic gain control, and several other audio enhancement technologies which ensure the clearest audio experience for attendees. Whiteboard collaboration enables interaction between local and remote users, and numerous apps come pre-installed with the IdeaHub. When not being used for collaboration purposes, your IdeaHub can function as a digital advertising or bulletin board solution. With more and more workers likely to be participating from remote locations, and many organizations looking to reduce their staff travel requirements, leaders need to invest in technology that ensures they can still gain great benefits from collaboration and presentation sessions. By combining the latest in audiovisual technology with high-speed networking and advanced presentation functionality, the Huawei IdeaHub provides the perfect solution for organisations that wish to maximize staff productivity and collaboration without the expense and inconvenience of constantly bringing people together. To find out more or to book your life demonstration contact: Huaweisales@mustek.co.za 011 237 1000 You can also find out more from Mustek about becoming a reseller by completing the form below. 