Cryptocurrency has become a popular way to invest money among South Africans. However, many find it intimidating to find the right platform to start their cryptocurrency journeys. If you are looking for a single location to choose between a vast range of cryptocurrencies, OVEX is the obvious answer. OVEX also offers an automated crypto Arbitrage Service Click here to learn more about OVEX Arbitrage opportunities. OVEX is an incredibly popular cryptocurrency platform that lets you choose from a wide range of coins. These options span both tethered cryptocurrencies – like TrueUSD and Binance USD – and those which are completely independent of fiat currencies – like Bitcoin. This opens up a world of investment opportunities to you and thanks to the intuitive OVEX interface, investing in these different coins is incredibly simple. Not only can you choose from a vast range of coins, you can also choose from a variety of investment types. OVEX Interest accounts let you earn interest on your cryptocurrency, much like a traditional savings account. This is a guaranteed revenue stream, with interest paid out daily. Alternatively, over-the-counter (OTC) trading is available for institutions and high net-worth individuals to access unmatched execution and settlement services. OVEX offers 24/7 support and boasts margin services, ultra-deep liquidity, low fees, and efficient post-trade settlement. Finally, cryptocurrency arbitrage is incredibly popular among OVEX customers – who have already made over R25 million in profits from this investment type. In recent years, South African Bitcoin markets have traded at an average premium of 4.6% when compared to US Bitcoin markets, making it easy to earn a profit by buying Bitcoin in one market, and selling it in the other. South African OVEX customers may use their Single Discretionary Allowance (SDA) of R1 million and Foreign Investment Allowance (FIA) of up to R10 million to take part in these arbitrage opportunities. If you are interested in learning more about OVEX’s cryptocurrency investment options, or would like to begin your investment journey, their team are always happy to help. Click here to learn more about OVEX interest accounts.