As South Africa finally begins its mass Covid-19 vaccination programme, the country’s economic recovery faces a double-blow due to rising Covid-19 cases and the return of power cuts, say economists from the Bureau for Economic Research (BER). Domestically, the key development over the last week is a continued rise in Covid-19 infections, the BER said. While the country has not officially entered into a third Covid-19 wave, the BER said that the country will now be entering a period of caution as the Covid-19 cases continue to rise. “Depending on how much further the upward trend in new cases goes, and importantly government’s response to it, this has the potential to interrupt the domestic economic recovery,” it said. “Even if government decides not to impose major new restrictions on movement or activity in certain sectors, consumer and firm behaviour is likely to turn more cautious in the event of an outright likely third wave. “For some time, we have been flagging this as a key factor that could cap the magnitude of the projected 2021 real GDP bounce in South Africa.” South Africa on Sunday recorded 2,585 new Covid-19 cases after 27,543 tests were conducted, representing a 9.4% positivity rate. Health minister, Dr Zweli Mkhize, announced that 27 patients succumbed to Covid-19 on Sunday, bringing the death toll to 55,210 to date. Of the latest fatalities, 10 are from Gauteng, six from Mpumalanga, five from KwaZulu-Natal, three from the Western Cape, two from the Free State and one from the Northern Cape. The country has 34,166 active cases. With 7,671 people who are currently infected in Gauteng, the province is now the hardest hit in terms of active cases. Load shedding The country’s economic recovery efforts face another blow after embattled power utility Eskom implemented load shedding on Sunday evening following the loss of 10 generating units at seven power stations. The power utility implemented loadshedding on Sunday afternoon and it is expected to end on Tuesday evening. “The failure of three generation units at Tutuka was due to loss of air compressors; a unit at Majuba was forced to shutdown, while another unit tripped. “A generation unit at Kriel was taken down for a boiler tube leak. A unit was forced down due to a steam leak at a unit at Matla power station, while trips at a unit each at Medupi, Kusile and the Duvha power stations are being investigated,” Eskom said on Sunday. This represents a total loss of 6 ,044MW over this 24 hour period, bringing the total unplanned capacity lost to 16,118MW. Planned maintenance is 4,171MW. Credit ratings agency Fitch ratings said that Eskom’s load shedding is likely to continue for the near future, despite the recent procurement initiatives the power utility has introduced. In a note published oat the end of April, Fitch said that the power shortfall should be addressed in the medium-term by Eskom’s plan to improve the performance of its power plants, in turn reducing the usage of high-cost open-cycle gas turbines (OCGTs) and improving profit margin. “However, any near-term delays in the implementation of the plan or increase in unplanned losses would increase load shedding for customers and costs for Eskom, further pressuring its standalone credit profile,” it said. Data published by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) in March shows that 2020 saw 859 hours of load shedding. The most intensive load shedding was seen before the Covid-19 lockdown, which accounted for 63% of all load shedding seen in 2020. Most of this was stage 2 load shedding, the research body said. Read: Clicks and Dis-chem to offer Covid-19 vaccines in South Africa – what you should know