The Shoprite Group has opened applications for two of its bursary programme for the 2022 academic year. The bursaries offer students in the fields of pharmacy and retail business management an unparalleled opportunity to further their studies. Students will then be given a chance to then go on to work for Africa’s largest retailer, Shoprite said. In the 2020 academic year, Shoprite said that it spent R17.3 million on its bursary programme and supported 271 students, including 191 from previously disadvantaged backgrounds, of which 150 students are females. Registered university students with a 65% aggregate or higher are encouraged to apply via the group’s bursary page before 30 June 2021. Pharmacy The pharmacy bursary aims to attract and fund talented pharmacy students who have a passion for healthcare in the retail industry. Shoprite said its pharmacy programme will give exposure to different aspects within its pharmaceutical division. “You will also get to learn our core retail business as all our MediRite Pharmacies are within our Checkers, Checker Hyper, and Shoprite stores. “Registered university students with a 65% aggregate or higher are encouraged to apply. This bursary will only be offered to first and second-year pharmacy students.” Upon graduation, pharmacy graduates join the group as interns for a year. This is followed by 12 months of community service, whereafter graduates return to Medirite as fully qualified pharmacists. Successful candidates will meet the following criteria: Bachelor of Pharmacy Degree;
65% Aggregate;
First and second academic year;
South African citizen;
27 years old and younger. Retail business management A bursary in retail business management is a particularly strong offering for ambitious students looking to advance their careers. The bursary aims at attracting and funding future Trainee Retail Managers who want to follow the exciting management career in the largest retailer in Africa. “The Shoprite bursary is a stepping stone into our company and guarantees you a career with the group upon the successful completion of your course. “As as graduate, you will be joining the largest distributor of grocery products in Africa. “Registered university students with a 60% aggregate or higher are encouraged to apply. This bursary will only be offered to second and third year Retail Business Management students.” The group said it is constantly opening new supermarkets across its Checkers, Shoprite & Usave brands, and this presents hard-working graduates with plenty of opportunities to move through the ranks to ultimately become branch and/or regional managers. Successful candidates will meet the following criteria: Diploma in Retail Business Management;
60%+ Aggregate;
Second and third academic year;
South African citizen;
27 years old and younger. Read: The Tesla of coffee: startup brews new cup of Joe