87 sites across South Africa are ready to vaccinate the elderly as the country ramps up its vaccination efforts, says health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize. Addressing the media on Sunday evening (16 May), Mkhize said the government will run 83 of the vaccination sites, while four will be in the private sector. He added that his department was hoping to scale up these centres to about 200 by the end of the week. Mkhize reiterated the government’s strategy to immunise citizens who are aged 60 and above in the second phase of the Covid-19 vaccination plan as they are deemed the most vulnerable of becoming ill or dying. “We will continue to vaccinate healthcare workers and complete the targeted 1.2 million by the end of the week,” he said.  He added that the government was targeting to inoculate five million senior citizens by the end of June, provided there is enough supply of vaccines. He said that citizens receiving a vaccine should take their acceptable documents for identity verification such as ID card or book, drivers licence or passport. Meanwhile, people who belong to a medical aid scheme should carry their medical aid card or other details. How to register Mkhize said that elderly citizens can register for the vaccine through the following processes: Online at vaccine.enroll.gov.za.
Using the WhatsApp line 0600 123456.
Via SMS by dialling *134*832#.
Call the Covid-19 hotline 0800 029 999. To date, over 1.227 million senior citizens and over 914,000 healthcare workers have signed up on EVDS, which brings the number to over 2.1 million citizens. “We recommend that as many people as possible register beforehand,” Mkhize said, noting that vaccination centres are currently not allowing walk-ins. “However, going forward, we will be able to do so. The programme has been designed to avoid long queues. This is why it is important that as many people as possible register beforehand, and follow the instructions which they receive by SMS.” Mkhize said citizens living in old age homes will not receive an SMS because the vaccines will be brought to them. He said that government is targeting 7,700 senior citizens living in 102 old age homes by the end of the week, and 50,000 citizens documented in old age homes are targeted to be vaccinated by the end of May. “If you miss your vaccine appointment for any reason, you will be rescheduled [and] given another date and time to be vaccinated,” he said.  He warned, however, that if a person misses three appointments, they will not be rescheduled again. “However, you will still be on the system, and can ask to be scheduled again by phoning the Covid-19 hotline or visiting a registration site.” Read: Clicks and Dis-chem to offer Covid-19 vaccines in South Africa – what you should know