Advancements in technology and evolving crime patterns have changed the face of the security industry, introducing a highly systems-driven approach to provide communities with the necessary support and tech innovation, says Fidelity Services Group, South Africa’s largest private security solutions provider. In this kind of environment it is sometimes easy to downplay the human connection, but security is personal and communities are not all the same,” the group said. “Automated services definitely have a place, but research shows that when it comes to complex or sensitive interaction, the majority of people still prefer to talk to a human being and when it comes to their own community safety, they want someone who is locally-based.” “In our urban areas specifically, we have also seen the value of hyper-localised solutions that are customised for those specific areas. This approach impacts significantly on agility and improved service delivery,” said Wahl Bartmann, CEO of Fidelity Services Group. Bartmann said it has necessitated a rethink of how the Fidelity residential business is structured in the bigger suburbs, which has given rise to the launch of Urban branches in the Gauteng regions specifically. “It’s the age old adage, ‘the bigger you get the smaller you must become’ and that’s where the customisation really comes to the fore,” he said. He said a locally-based business centre in these urban footprints is key to a more personalised service. Smaller competitors have got it right in many areas, but they lack the backing and robustness of a larger player, Bartmann said. “You have to be able to grow with the area and offer a more mature structure as needs evolve.” The chief executive said the new urban structure will have a far smaller customer to management ratio and each urban branch will be headed up by a branch manager who has full ownership and responsibility for the performance of the branch. All resources in the branch will report directly to the manager including sales, technical operations, collections and administration. “This is generally where you can find bottlenecks in a more centralised structure so we are hoping to integrate all these services at branch level,” he said. The branch manager will be supported by a community operations manager, who will all be based at the local branch and available to any walk in customer. “If any of the team are not available during the time of the walk in, then an appointment can be made,” he said. Solutions will also be tailored to address specific problems in each of these urban areas, said Bartmann. “The approach has worked very well in our LSS schemes and even in estates. It helps us align the tech side with sales and operations so everyone has the same objective.” The urban branches will not have a dedicated monitoring centre, however. Calls will go through to an auto dispatch system and be managed accordingly. “With this system, you get emergency assistance at a fraction of the time it takes human-operated radio networks to react. Calls are prioritised by type and customers and vehicles are clustered into segments so the closest vehicle can be dispatched,” said Bartmann. Depending on the needs of the community, there will be a dedicated customer services centre with a direct telephone number. Where applicable, off-site monitoring of community cameras will be done in the localised customer service centre. “We are starting off with a total of five branches which will be rolled out by the end of April,” said Bartmann. Branches in Phase 1 include: Centurion, West Rand, Bryanston, East Rand and Johannesburg South. Phase 2 will be rolled out during the latter part of 2021 and early 2022 and include Pretoria East, Pretoria North, Greenside, Johannesburg North, Garsfontein the far East Rand and Johannesburg Central. With regard to staffing, Bartmann said the business has been through a rigorous redeployment exercise, and has brought in new talent with the correct experience. “It is key that we develop the correct culture in each of these branches. The branches need to immerse themselves in the suburbs and really develop an in-depth understanding of the issues so the correct solutions can be introduced and rolled out, either on land via our armed response teams or via our air support crews,” he said. Read: What are your rights if you have to cancel your lease when you’re retrenched?