The Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse (Outa) says that the department of transport needs to introduce wholesale changes to fix South Africa’s chaotic driver’s license renewal process. The civil society group said that this should include changing the period of renewal for driver’s licences from the current five years to 10 years. The group has also proposed digitally registering driver’s licenses and linking them to identity document cards. “If government wants to find a solution for this problem, they need to treat the cause and not the symptoms,” said Dominique Msibi, portfolio manager for Outa’s public governance division. “We need to see a complete system overhaul that is more innovative and convenient to motorists but that achieves what the driver’s license was set out to achieve in the first place. We also need to see a corruption-proof system and a process that deals with incompetence in the public service.” The push comes after transport minister Fikile Mbalula announced a number of planned improvements for the renewal process in his department budget speech on Friday (21 May). Mbalula said that his department has taken heed of a ‘plethora of complaints’ from members of the public around driver and vehicle licencing. “The end-game of our interventions is improved service delivery and enhanced efficiency in the functioning of DLTCs, free of corruption.” he said. “We have engaged as the three spheres of government and have agreed on a range of measures that will address the most pressing challenges relating to driver and vehicle licensing.” Mbalula said that this will include: Longer operating hours at licensing centres;
The use of technology to eliminate queues;
The introduction of an online interface for optometrist and medical practitioners to upload eye test results on the eNatis. However, Msibi said that the entire driver’s license renewal system is flawed, from beginning to end. “New cards or a different booking system will only treat the symptoms, not the cause. In order to make an informed decision on tangible solutions, one needs to get behind the facts.  We are not convinced that the minister will address the issues effectively.,” she said. Outa’s research shows that there are a vast number of complaints from motorists as well as those responsible for the administration of the system. This includes IT problems resulting in administrative systems that are offline, short office hours, lack of payment options, appointments made but not adhered to and long queues, amongst others. “South African motorists need holistic solutions that are far more innovative, such as a driver’s licenses digitally registered and linked to their identity document cards. “This can then automatically be updated by optometrists once a client had done their eye tests, but it remains to be seen if the Minister is serious about addressing the real problems”, Msibi said. “The minister should engage in vigorous public consultation before he attempts to implement a final solution.” Read: E-tolls – another missed opportunity says Automobile Association