Peterjohn Bishop is the vice president of Partners, Accountants and Alliances for Africa and Middle East at Sage. He is skilled in business process design, software documentation, business intelligence, business process improvement, and telecommunications. Bishop started his career at Sage as a junior consultant and moved up the ranks, taking up the roles of projects consulting manager and national consulting manager before being appointed as director of professional services in October 2016. He was promoted to vice president of services for Africa and the Middle East until his appointment to his current role in October 2019. Bishop is responsible for growing, developing, and enabling Sage’s regional network of business partners, accountants and strategic alliance partners – working closely with partners to build a customer-focused SaaS ecosystem that helps businesses to accelerate growth. In the first episode of Business Talk – Owning it with Sage, Bishop shares insight into the tools that Sage provides for small business owners to help them understand their business better, make better decisions, and provide better outcomes for customers and staff. Bishop explains how the newly launched Sage Business Cloud Marketplace in South Africa provides customers with a curated selection of cloud-native and cloud-connected apps to help businesses perform at their best. He also details the benefits available to small businesses that use the capabilities of cloud solutions – including dramatically enhanced customer experience, and better process automation and self-service capabilities for independent software vendors. Business Talk – Owning it with Sage is hosted by Michael Avery and features discussions with South Africa’s top finance, SME, and fintech experts. The full interview with PJ Bishop is embedded below. Find all the Business Talk – Owning it with Sage interviews here. <span style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" data-mce-type="bookmark" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span>