Despite the benefits, recent research indicates that 94% of professionals report that they face challenges when working from home. Amongst these are the technical challenges of internet speed and issues with virtual private networks (VPNs). Click here to learn more about Duxbury Networking. A generational shift toward a completely distributed workforce is currently happening as employers are challenged to provide fast, secure and easy connectivity to their remote workforce. “But, designed in the 1960s, the Internet’s inventors never envisioned the needs of the 21st century enterprise. Our enterprises have gone from centralised, to hub-and-spoke, to distributed cloud enterprises. We now expect a significant number of our employees to work remotely indefinitely and data and applications to continue migrating to multiple clouds. The distributed enterprise can no longer be served by old networking and security schemes. The world has evolved, and your network needs to change as well,” says Paul Stuttard, Duxbury Networking’s Cape Town Branch Manager. Duxbury Networking was recently appointed as a distributor for the Ananda Networks range of solutions. “With Ananda’s 100% software-based approach there is no need to install any hardware, change the underlying network setup, or force the entire organisation to transition to the new network all at the same time. Just deploy a lightweight client and your users are all connected,” says Stuttard. Ananda solutions allow users to achieve optimal results that include: Authentication and authorisation: Ananda integrates with major enterprise identity management systems to provide ease of use and SSO.
Private, zero trust networks: This reduces your network attack surface to virtually zero.
Advanced protocols.
SmartPath technology: Ananda’s control plane directs the network to establish the optimal route between any two nodes. Unlike most existing solutions, the Ananda network is distributed and can route such a connection optimally.
Identity-based routing: Ananda applies its identity-based routing algorithm to locate the destination node on your private network based on its identity (for example, john@acme.com).
Multi-WAN support.
End-to-end encryption.
Native micro-segmentation.
Full visibility. Connect your distributed workforce You need to securely and efficiently connect remote employees and branches to multiple resources in your data centre and clouds. Ananda Networks is ideal for the distributed workforce as it allows organisations to easily create private networks that connect all users and services together as if they are on the same local network and do so without deploying complex and expensive hardware or changing the underlying network setup. Enable cloud transformation Ananda allows IT or DevOps users to connect to IaaS or PaaS infrastructure and provides remote employees with faster and more secure access to SaaS applications. This is achieved by allowing users to create their own private overlay network that connects users and cloud services with the simplicity and economics of a LAN. Ananda allows you to easily provision and manage these networks from the cloud, based on user identity. When resources are moved to the cloud, there is nothing to re-configure since Ananda provides a virtualised network layer that is agnostic to the actual location and will securely and optimally connect it to the network wherever it might be. Simplify, replace appliances, reduce costs Using the Ananda network for the entire organisation or a subset thereof (for example, remote users, branch offices) can save significant cost and resources by removing unnecessary hardware and software, and lowering the management and operational costs: Ananda can provide the distributed workforce with an alternative to MPLS, high-bandwidth connections, or expensive SD-WAN hardware with a software-only solution that works with commodity hardware and better utilises network resources.
Ananda Networks makes multiple software agents already installed unnecessary (for example, VPN, remote access, HIPS).
Purchasing and managing firewall, VPN and SD-WAN appliances is no longer required since connecting via the Ananda network fabric provides all the same benefits.
The management of multiple solutions can be consolidated into a single view (for example, remote access, internal micro-segmentation, cloud access, NAC). “Ananda does not require the installation of centralised hardware appliances or sending traffic through its infrastructure. As such, it can be implemented with commodity hardware and adopted within minutes without impacting the entire enterprise network. It ensures end-to-end encryption built-in segmentation, and true zero-trust functionality virtually eliminating the network attack surface,” says Stuttard. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za